**Nine to Noon**

The Secret Workday

of Uber-Wealthy Americans

By John Wooten

Listen along at:

[**book.ninetonoonsecrets.com**](http://book.ninetonoonsecrets.com)

*To the scholar, confidant, and investor*

*who illuminated the value of teaching.*

*Thank you, Jake Crapster*

Copyright Â© 2019 John F. Wooten, IV. All rights reserved.

Paperback ISBN: 978-1-7945-6685-9

Hardcover ISBN: 979-8-4829-2018-3

Graciously edited freely by Lydia Adams, Brittany Blitstein, Tristan
Boggess, Gus Beaumont, Jenna Carter, Ryan Creel, Hannah Gorski, Lucas
Holzen, Jenna Johnson, Jacob King, Willy Leung, Kenneth Long, Anthony
Love, Caroline Macfee, Emma McElroy, Alvin Mutongi, Ashley Pehan, Jack
Podielsky, Kailee Queen, Keily Stiles, Christian Sturt, Annie Thomas,
Joseph Wessler, Davis Wilder, and Kailee Zeltner.

By accessing or using this material, you agree to assume all risks and
responsibilities for your financial and investment decisions, and you
release the author and the publisher from any liability for any and all
losses, financial or otherwise. This material is provided \"as-is\" and
\"as available,\" with no warranties or representations of any kind,
either express or implied, including but not limited to, warranties of
accuracy, reliability, completeness, or timeliness. Neither the author
nor the publisher shall be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental,
consequential, punitive, or exemplary damages, including but not limited
to, loss of profits, goodwill, other intangible losses, arising from the
use or reliance on the information herein.

The content of this book is intended solely for informational and
educational purposes. It is not, and should not be construed as,
financial, legal, accounting, tax, or investment advice. Consult
qualified professionals for personalized guidance tailored to your
individual circumstances. By reading this material, you acknowledge that
the strategies, information, and case studies presented are neither
universally applicable nor comprehensive. Laws, regulations, and tax
codes can vary by jurisdiction and are subject to change; therefore, you
as the reader are solely responsible for understanding and complying
with the laws and regulations in your specific jurisdiction.

Investing involves substantial risk, including but not limited to the
loss of at least your entire principal investment. Leveraged or
speculative investments carry additional, amplified risks. Although the
book may discuss past trading performance, such references have inherent
limitations and should not be relied upon for predicting future
performance or investment outcomes. No guarantees or warranties are made
regarding the success or efficacy of any investment strategies
discussed.

Tax laws are intricate, subject to continual modification, and can
sometimes apply retroactively, causing incremental liabilities,
interest, or penalties. The book expressly disclaims any responsibility
for financial or tax planning decisions made based on the content herein
and all liabilities you may incur, including but not limited to capital
losses, tax penalties, brokerage fees, bank charges, and legal fees.

Online platforms may let you practice with simulated money, but they
fall short of mimicking the emotional dynamics involved in real-world
trading. Discipline, emotion management, and real market conditions like
liquidity, slippage, and volume limits are crucial factors not fully
captured by such simulations. Use with caution.

[www.wootenwealth.com](http://www.wootenwealth.com)

# Table of Contents {#table-of-contents .TOC-Heading}

[Preface to the Second Edition [7](#preface)](#preface)

[Part One: Fundamental Analysis
[9](#part-one-fundamental-analysis)](#part-one-fundamental-analysis)

[Secret #1: Morning of an Active Trader
[11](#morning-of-an-active-trader)](#morning-of-an-active-trader)

[Secret #2: Your First Steps Toward Financial Alchemy
[18](#your-first-steps-toward-financial-alchemy)](#your-first-steps-toward-financial-alchemy)

[Secret #3: Stock Trading --- A Gateway to Financial Freedom?
[20](#stock-trading-a-gateway-to-financial-freedom)](#stock-trading-a-gateway-to-financial-freedom)

[Secret #4: Mastering Fundamentals for Investment Success
[28](#mastering-fundamentals-for-investment-success)](#mastering-fundamentals-for-investment-success)

[Secret #5: The Golden Rules to Wealth
[32](#the-golden-rules-to-wealth)](#the-golden-rules-to-wealth)

[Secret #6: The Ultimate Retirement Fund Playbook
[35](#the-ultimate-retirement-fund-playbook)](#the-ultimate-retirement-fund-playbook)

[Secret #7: Hatching Tax-Free Educational Nest Eggs
[47](#hatching-tax-free-educational-nest-eggs)](#hatching-tax-free-educational-nest-eggs)

[Secret #8: How to Cut Through the Tax Maze for Stress-Free Financial
Wins
[61](#how-to-cut-through-the-tax-maze-for-stress-free-financial-wins)](#how-to-cut-through-the-tax-maze-for-stress-free-financial-wins)

[Secret #9: Break Free from the Debt Vortex and Unleash Your True
Financial Potential
[83](#break-free-from-the-debt-vortex-and-unleash-your-true-financial-potential)](#break-free-from-the-debt-vortex-and-unleash-your-true-financial-potential)

[Secret #10: A New Financial Frontier Unveiled
[85](#a-new-financial-frontier-unveiled)](#a-new-financial-frontier-unveiled)

[Secret #11: Mastering the Hieroglyphics of Stock Charts
[89](#mastering-the-hieroglyphics-of-stock-charts)](#mastering-the-hieroglyphics-of-stock-charts)

[Secret #12: Explore the Market Wilderness of Bulls and Bears
[92](#explore-the-market-wilderness-of-bulls-and-bears)](#explore-the-market-wilderness-of-bulls-and-bears)

[Secret #13: Using News to Guide Your Investing Compass
[94](#using-news-to-guide-your-investing-compass)](#using-news-to-guide-your-investing-compass)

[Secret #14: Turn Market Downturns into Gold
[96](#turn-market-downturns-into-gold)](#turn-market-downturns-into-gold)

[Secret #15: Decoding 17 Key Metrics for Top Stocks
[98](#decoding-17-key-metrics-for-top-stocks)](#decoding-17-key-metrics-for-top-stocks)

[Secret #16: The Zen of Long-Term, Low-Touch Investing
[116](#the-zen-of-long-term-low-touch-investing)](#the-zen-of-long-term-low-touch-investing)

[Secret #17: Wield the Power of ETFs and Mutual Funds
[122](#wield-the-power-of-etfs-and-mutual-funds)](#wield-the-power-of-etfs-and-mutual-funds)

[Secret #18: The 'Spice Trade' of Commodities and Currencies
[131](#the-spice-trade-of-commodities-and-currencies)](#the-spice-trade-of-commodities-and-currencies)

[Secret #19: Market Dynamics and the 7 Order Types
[146](#market-dynamics-and-the-7-order-types)](#market-dynamics-and-the-7-order-types)

[Secret #20: Growth Tactics with Active Trader Status
[153](#growth-tactics-with-active-trader-status)](#growth-tactics-with-active-trader-status)

[Secret #21: A World of Optional Opportunities
[161](#a-world-of-optional-opportunities)](#a-world-of-optional-opportunities)

[Secret #22: Secure Your Financial Haven with Bonds by Mastering the
Interest Rate Game
[175](#secure-your-financial-haven-with-bonds-by-mastering-the-interest-rate-game)](#secure-your-financial-haven-with-bonds-by-mastering-the-interest-rate-game)

[Part Two: Technical Analysis
[193](#part-two-technical-analysis)](#part-two-technical-analysis)

[Secret #23: Master Market Trends with Advanced Chartology
[195](#master-market-trends-with-advanced-chartology)](#master-market-trends-with-advanced-chartology)

[Secret #24: Top 3 Ways to Uncover Financial Insights by Marking up Your
Charts
[207](#top-3-ways-to-uncover-financial-insights-by-marking-up-your-charts)](#top-3-ways-to-uncover-financial-insights-by-marking-up-your-charts)

[Secret #25: How to Navigate Markets Trends by Charting Your Treasure
Map with Trendlines
[213](#how-to-navigate-markets-trends-by-charting-your-treasure-map-with-trendlines)](#how-to-navigate-markets-trends-by-charting-your-treasure-map-with-trendlines)

[Secret #26: Geometric Profits with Triangles and Wedges
[216](#geometric-profits-with-triangles-and-wedges)](#geometric-profits-with-triangles-and-wedges)

[Secret #27: How to Time Your Trades More Precisely with Standout Market
Flags and Consolidation Patterns
[223](#how-to-time-your-trades-more-precisely-with-standout-market-flags-and-consolidation-patterns)](#how-to-time-your-trades-more-precisely-with-standout-market-flags-and-consolidation-patterns)

[Secret #28: How to Unearth Profits with the Hidden Formula in ABCD
Patterns
[228](#how-to-unearth-profits-with-the-hidden-formula-in-abcd-patterns)](#how-to-unearth-profits-with-the-hidden-formula-in-abcd-patterns)

[Secret #29: How to Anticipate Newsworthy Moves with the
Head-and-Shoulders Enigma
[234](#how-to-anticipate-newsworthy-moves-with-the-head-and-shoulders-enigma)](#how-to-anticipate-newsworthy-moves-with-the-head-and-shoulders-enigma)

[Secret #30: Unlock Market Trends with Candlestick Magic
[238](#unlock-market-trends-with-candlestick-magic)](#unlock-market-trends-with-candlestick-magic)

[Secret #31: Harmonic Convergence in Moving Averages and MACD -- Your
Secret to Trend Timing
[241](#harmonic-convergence-in-moving-averages-and-macd-your-secret-to-trend-timing)](#harmonic-convergence-in-moving-averages-and-macd-your-secret-to-trend-timing)

[Secret #32: The Power Trio of RSI, Stochastics, and Bollinger Bands
[249](#the-power-trio-of-rsi-stochastics-and-bollinger-bands)](#the-power-trio-of-rsi-stochastics-and-bollinger-bands)

[Secret #33: Master Circuit 'Safety Nets' and VWAP for Momentum and
Volatility Gains
[263](#master-circuit-safety-nets-and-vwap-for-momentum-and-volatility-gains)](#master-circuit-safety-nets-and-vwap-for-momentum-and-volatility-gains)

[Secret #34: Fusion Strategies
[272](#transform-your-patterns-with-fusion-strategies)](#transform-your-patterns-with-fusion-strategies)

[Secret #35: Portfolio Harmony and the Essence of Diversification
[277](#portfolio-harmony-and-the-essence-of-diversification)](#portfolio-harmony-and-the-essence-of-diversification)

[Secret #36: The Trader's Lens Demystifies Stock Selection
[298](#the-traders-lens-demystifies-stock-selection)](#the-traders-lens-demystifies-stock-selection)

[Secret #37: Navigating Brokerage Nuances for Strategic Execution
[304](#navigating-brokerage-nuances-for-strategic-execution)](#navigating-brokerage-nuances-for-strategic-execution)

[[Secret #38:]{.mark} Mind Over Markets --- Unlock the Ideal Trading
Mentality
[327](#mind-over-markets-unlock-the-ideal-trading-mentality)](#mind-over-markets-unlock-the-ideal-trading-mentality)

# Preface

When new friends learn that my idea of fun is trading stocks, they
usually have chuckled responses. They might never share my enthusiasm
for the adrenaline-pumping highs and lows of the stock market, and
that\'s okay. Even if you don\'t catch the trading bug, this book is
designed to guide you on that path, should you choose to take it. The
reason I am writing this preface before dusk on a scenic train is
because of this bug---my enthusiasm for trading---that I hope to share
with you.

Many people (myself included just seven years ago) have a limited
understanding of how financial markets operate. The so-called 'market
gurus' often lead us to believe that investing is too complicated or
requires a full-time commitment. This pushes us to entrust our financial
futures to others who are more concerned with racking up management fees
than delivering solid returns. Time and again, even the top brokerage
firms put your "diversified portfolio" in the hands of accountants who
might be book-smart but lack effective investment strategies. Meanwhile,
professional money managers are getting impressive returns in hedge
funds that are typically only accessible to the ultra-wealthy. This
imbalance is what this book aims to correct.

In our modern age, no one should have to settle for subpar investment
returns because they lack the right information. This book is your first
step in changing that.

Writing this book was a Herculean effort, juggling academics, sports,
and the fast-paced world of trading. It encapsulates years of trial and
error, sleepless nights, and the victories that led to the launch of our
first hedge fund. We\'ve used the tactics laid out in these pages to
consistently outperform the market, even when skeptics thought it
couldn\'t be done. For example, Secret #22 introduces a little-known
tool we employed to successfully short the market during the onset of
the 2020 pandemic, before it made headlines. Average time to implement
the analysis: just 35 minutes.

I wrote *Nine to Noon* because, when first diving into trading, all the
conflicting information felt completely overwhelming. The web was
flooded with sub-par investing advice. Take Secret #26, for example,
where I discuss a reliable yet often misinterpreted trading strategy. In
my early days, I made the costly mistake of selling a significant
position based on a misleading article, when the strategy was signaling
me to buy. The fallout? I missed out on a windfall when the stock surged
25% in hours following positive earnings.

That blunder was a wake-up call. Why should a poorly researched blog
post lead to a financial loss on my end? Furthermore, if there\'s so
much conflicting information out there, how can someone without a
finance degree hope to invest successfully?

That one trade, along with countless others, set me on a journey of
learning through losses---a kind of market tuition, as seasoned traders
often refer to it. I paid my dues, to the tune of six figures, and spent
nearly five years getting to grips with every investable market out
there.

Now, I write with a sense of thrill and accomplishment. This book is the
crux of modern trading strategies, distilled down to my top 38
"battle-tested" secrets. These are the lessons that can fast-track your
investing skills, enabling you to trade like a hedge fund manager. I\'ve
designed it to be the ultimate resource that I hope even my kids will
treasure and use throughout their lives.

In good faith,

![Shape Description automatically
generated](media/image1.png){width="2.042253937007874in"
height="0.6915004374453193in"}

Interlaken, CH

February 2023

# Part One: Fundamental Analysis

In my early years navigating the financial markets, I focused on
mastering the basics---understanding equities, decoding balance sheets,
and making sense of market trends. I found that grasping these
fundamentals was key to making smarter investment choices, regardless of
asset type.

##  Morning of an Active Trader

It is nine in the morning; you sit down. You do not know what the
approaching trading day has in store, but you are ready to tackle
anything the market throws at you.

You are not in an office building. You are not on Wall Street. You are
not even fully dressed. But none of that matters. You sit at your
computer this morning eager to work because you want to reap the
rewards. You work from anywhere with an internet connection, linking you
directly into the greatest financial market this world has ever seen.

First thing is first: premarket screeners. You scan through twenty
gapping stocks as quickly as you can. You carefully analyze volume,
price range, and percent change on the fly. Tickers fly down your screen
as you pick your favorite movers. Everything you see has crossed your
eyes a thousand times before.

Fifteen percent gainer?

Twenty-four percent gainer?

Sixty-two percent gainer? With that volume?

Is that \$TOPS?

You see all the same things over and over every day, but somehow it is
always different. You never remember the tickers that never stay around,
yet you always come back to find more. The potential is here, and you
can see it.

9:05

You get your favorite movers up on the charts; each stock needs to be
decoded. You zoom out, looking at both the last week and years into the
past. You find a double-top resistance, a short-term trendline, and a
head-and-shoulders setup from last year. Great news! You know that these
price levels will be high-tension points for the movement today, and you
draw them on your chart accordingly. Next, you zoom back into the real
game: the short-term. You drew your historical support and resistance
lines, and now you have a better idea of where this stock can soar.

9:10

You grab another preferred stock off the screener and repeat. It is all
about opportunity. You do not know what today's biggest mover will be,
but you do know that everything happens quickly in this game. You type
the ticker into a chart and look for historical resistance levels. These
might be your sell targets today if the stock can manage to go high
enough. You know that your early price outlining will pay off in today's
rapid trading by giving you a slight edge over everyone else, an edge
that tells you when to sell when they hold into a pullback.

9:15

You keep charting long-term price levels for all the stocks you like on
your premarket-gainers screener. As long as you see the volume to
support a trade intraday, you see the need to mark historical price
levels. There are different movers every morning, and you have to chart
every day to stay on top of the game. Everything moves once we hit the
bell.

9:25

You finish marking supports and resistances for all your favorite
premarket gainers, and you know you have done the best you can with what
you have. If anything had a serious run-up before this morning, you know
about it. Now, you move on to catalysts. Starting with your most
promising picks, you run a quick news scan to see if anything could
really shoot the stock price up today. You look for anything that could
bring the stock price climbing today, and then you see it.

FDA approval!

New patents!

Stellar earnings!

New executives!

You never care what the news is because you look at everything the same.
If anything brings others to the stock, then you are happy to cut them
into the game. Higher volume means even more attention, liquidity, and
implied volatility, and you wake up every morning for those three.

9:28

You refresh all your screeners and look for any new last-second movers
you may have glanced over earlier. If you find any, you draw in
historical price levels and hope to see the stock approach them. You
play everything off the charts; candlesticks are your portal into the
game.

You make sure that you go into today's market with the best information
you could find. Your twelve different charts are simultaneously polling
market backends, begging to see today's first candle. You know that the
floodgates are about to open, and you are almost ready.

9:29

You prefill all your order boxes with the number of shares needed to
make up your intended individual position cash sizes. You never thought
you could punch numbers into a calculator this quickly before, but you
know that everything needs to be perfect when you hear[---]{.mark}

[9:30]{.mark}

[ *DING DING DING*]{.mark}

[The sound never gets old. Every time you hear the opening bell, you
know that the American economy is open for business. Premarket orders
flood the world's largest exchanges faster than you can push send on
your market buy. Everything starts moving, and it is finally time to
start trading.]{.mark}

[You know that the next half hour is the most volatile time in the
market, and you are instantly ready to cash in on its movement. The
first thing you do is watch for quick price action in the stocks you
have identified. You jump onto short-term swings to catch some
early-market momentum. If you see a setup, you go straight to your
principles.]{.mark}

> [You use technical analysis to enter a position.]{.mark}
>
> [You have no bias for any one stock.]{.mark}
>
> [You condition yourself to buy and sell based on facts.]{.mark}
>
> [You avoid low volume trades without substantial upside.]{.mark}
>
> [You only trade cheap stocks with reasonable volatility]{.mark}
>
> [You always sell when you have profits with no backbone]{.mark}
>
> [You stick to hard stop-losses to mitigate risk]{.mark}
>
> [You are never stuck on one stock]{.mark}
>
> [You only use market orders in a fast-moving market]{.mark}
>
> [You play everything off the charts]{.mark}

[Your principles develop as you trade and always cater to your specific
style. They keep you disciplined, taking smart profits and cutting
losers quickly. You know the patterns and breakouts that you trade, and
you only take trades you can predict.]{.mark}

[9:45]{.mark}

[Time is a blur sitting idly behind the excitement, pressure, and
dopamine embedded in this morning's early trades. You have made your
quickest trades for the day. If anything was going to pop rapidly from
premarket activity, it has. You follow the gainers for the day in hopes
of continued momentum. If you are still in any positions because they
look promising, you start calculating how long it is safe to stay in
before exiting with profits. You move your stop-losses according to how
confident you are in positive movement. You understand the risk and
price levels to watch out for in your positions.]{.mark}

[If you are not actively in more than two or three trades, you pull up
your live scanners to find any new stocks collecting momentum and making
new highs for the day. You are always ready to find new opportunities
and quickly analyze new movers.]{.mark}

[10:00]{.mark}

[You continue watching for setups in the day's leading stocks. You
analyze the movement in the long list of stocks on your screens and
quickly weed out bad picks. You pull up the rest on different charts
until you find a good setup to trade. You never forget early movers in
the day that might have possible setups later on. You carefully and
calculatedly split your limited attention between it all.]{.mark}

[ Open positions.]{.mark}

[ Possible setups.]{.mark}

[ Order boxes.]{.mark}

[ Order size.]{.mark}

[ Unfilled positions.]{.mark}

[ Both old and newly-formed trendline patterns.]{.mark}

[ Indicator movement.]{.mark}

[ New gainers on the screener.]{.mark}

[ Catalysts for intraday movement.]{.mark}

> [Drawing and analyzing support and resistance levels.]{.mark}

[The pressure is on by ten because you are either looking to make big
gains after a slow open or trying to close out your massive profits for
the day before morning volatility fades away.]{.mark}

[10:15]{.mark}

[You listen to the markets and see how quickly everything is moving. You
pounce on stocks with the most volume and lowest spreads as soon as you
see great setups. You never hesitate to submit an order when you see a
surefire trade, but you also never forget to consider the downside. You
know that you will be fine as long as you keep your winners large and
your losers small.]{.mark}

[10:45]{.mark}

[By this time, most of your biggest trades have gone through. You are
looking to make a little off quick setups here and there when the market
presents them to you. You might start running through the most popular
stocks for the day one last time to spot any last-minute breakouts or
continuations. You treat any open positions normally and sell at your
sell targets or adapt to new prices if necessary. You look for any
closing trades to end your active session.]{.mark}

[11:00]{.mark}

[You start to finish your active trading and begin closing out all your
positions. This morning was energetic and swift. You took what you could
from the markets or gave some back. You never hold anything past the
close and rarely see setups as you near lunchtime. It is time to move on
to long-term portfolio management.]{.mark}

[The first thing you do is check to see how your long-term portfolio
performed this morning. You compare your percent change to that of the
three major American indices. Your long-term portfolio goal is to beat
all three indices every day. You know that you will have extremely
strong long-term growth if your picks can consistently beat the average
market return. If any of your positions have large movements, you look
at those first. You are constantly analyzing the long-term potential in
all of your picks and potential picks. After reading up on larger daily
catalysts such as big news, you take one more look over your actual
portfolio. You also check the progress of any swing trades that you may
want to exit. You want to make sure that everything you own is
performing give or take how you expect it to.]{.mark}

[11:15]{.mark}

[Once you are totally done with morning active trading, you start
looking at potential stocks to add to your long-term portfolio. You
stick with your standard researching and go over your potential buys
watchlists. You perform some technical analysis on a few promising
picks. If you see something you like and have been watching for a while
take a significant drop, you may put an order in for it. You are always
quick to reinvest dividends and profits because you know that
reinvesting compounding gains is the quickest way to grow your
account.]{.mark}

[If your portfolios do not stack up to the average market return in the
long run, you analyze the factors behind your underperformance and
consider ways to rebalance your portfolios to accelerate growth.
Additionally, you spend this time to consider how diversified you are
between independent markets as you constantly strive to diversify your
holdings.]{.mark}

[11:45]{.mark}

[At this point, you have looked at a few long-term stocks that you own
or may soon own. You have thought about the potential in the companies
and weighed the technicals and public perception to come up with an
opinion about the stocks at their current price levels. If you like a
position, you enter it when you see a good opportunity or with an
average cost spread across a longer time period.]{.mark}

[11:50]{.mark}

[You look for larger companies that moved a lot today. You see what made
the market move on a greater scale and consider the economic
implementations for your portfolio. You also add any stocks you learn
about and like to a watchlist for the future.]{.mark}

[11:55]{.mark}

[Nearing the end of the morning, you acknowledge your gains for the day
and make sure all your orders settled with your broker. You check for
any open orders and close out of all your trading software. You shut
down your scanners and finish any last minute long-term
analysis.]{.mark}

[Noon]{.mark}

[You enjoy a well-deserved lunch.]{.mark}

##  Your First Steps Toward Financial Alchemy

The nine-to-noon day might sound tough. Do not worry. People work for
years to master their morning trading. Let's start with a crucial
distinction:

Active Trading

Long-Term Investing

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

-   Technical analysis---no care for companies' fundamentals, financial
    reports, or key statistics.

-   Stocks found from screeners due to large percent changes and volume
    present.

-   Stocks generally priced under \$25.00 to maintain high volatility.

-   Catalysts can lead to massive price movements and great selling
    opportunities.

-   No emotional connections whatsoever towards traded companies.

-   You do not care what stocks you and sell.

-   Significantly faster price changes.

-   Technical analysis, company fundamentals, quarterly reports,
    dividends. and more should be considered.

-   Stocks generally found through a connection with the company,
    appreciation for the company\'s business model, attraction to
    valuation, potential for growth, diversification efforts, or other
    research.

-   Stock price is usually irrelevant.

-   Catalysts can support a long-term growth plan and help support
    holding a position.

-   Emotions may play into the public perception of a stock's price and
    should be considered.

-   All you care about is what you invest in.

[Of course, there is a middle ground between active trading and
long-term investing: swing trading. Swing trading primarily uses
technical analysis to identify medium-term movement potential in a
reputable stock. The stock needs to be reputable so that your position
does not lose significant value in premarket trading. This potential
loss is the primary reason you close out active trades before the end of
the market day. Most of the smaller stocks you actively trade are
unknown and could have potentially adverse downward moves in after-hours
trading (we will explore all of these terms throughout Part One).
Therefore, when you make a medium-term call on a swing trade, you want
the stock you trade to stay predictable for the next few weeks or so,
depending on the timespan of the setup you identify with the skills we
will develop in Part Two.]{.mark}

[When you swing trade, you should usually research and check on your
positions during the end of your nine-to-noon session once active
trading volatility has died down.]{.mark}

[Swing trading will often yield medium to high returns when done
correctly. Active trading generally yields higher returns, and long-term
investing generally yields lower returns. However, it is important to
find a good balance between active and long-term trading to stabilize
your income, mitigate risk, and work towards overarching savings and
retirement goals. Remember that some days may be unprofitable, but you
will succeed in the end as long as you win more than you lose.]{.mark}

##  Stock Trading --- A Gateway to Financial Freedom?

Before we talk about the stock market, I want you to better understand
what builds wealth. When you buy something, you can purchase either an
asset or a liability. When you buy a liability, that purchase takes
money out of your bank account repetitively. Say, for example, you buy a
house. Now, you have to pay for your bills, possibly your mortgage,
utility issues, paint, and more. This house is a liability because it
takes money out of your pocket after you buy it. On the other hand, if
you buy a house and rent it out to somebody, it is an asset as long as
the money you take in covers your expenses. When you make money from
buying something that pays you back over time, you have an asset! I want
you to make asset your new favorite word, because purchasing assets and
minimizing liabilities is the key to growing your wealth.

The three main types of assets are real estate, paper assets, and\
alternative investments or businesses. I focus on paper assets for
long-term growth because real estate investing (buying, renovating,
selling, renting houses, etc.) is a very different approach to wealth
management. Many real estate investments beat the average stock market
return, but these investments usually require much more time, attention,
management, maintenance, and operational skills that are completely
unneeded in the stock market.

Primary paper assets can be CDs, bonds, stocks, or cryptocurrencies.
Cryptocurrencies represent a significant chunk of my personal
investments, but I will not go into great depth about them in this book.
Cryptocurrencies are very new in the public investment space and, even
though I personally manage crypto, I understand if some investors avoid
this new technology.

> However, for those who embrace and trade crypto, I want you to know
> that everything you learn about technical analysis in Part Two of this
> book directly applies to swing trading and long-term investing in
> cryptocurrencies.

With that said, let's talk about CDs. Also known as [certificates of
deposit, CDs]{.mark} are the least risky of the three main paper assets.
CDs lock up your money for a predetermined amount of time in exchange
for a predetermined return. Banks, credit unions, investment firms, and
credit companies sell CDs and use the locked up money to fund lending
ventures. Because CDs are insured for up to \$250,000 by the FDIC or
NCUA, you are guaranteed your returns with a CD.[Â¹]{.mark} All you have
to do is determine how long you want to lock up your money, longer terms
yielding higher returns. Most CD providers offer a wide range of CD
terms to satisfy any investor while still giving the bank a reasonable
term.

If you withdraw your money or cancel a CD before the CD term expires,
you will pay a hefty fee and take a loss.[Â²]{.mark} Otherwise, these
investments are as safe as bank accounts. Because CDs bear the least
possible risk out of all paper assets, they pay the lowest return.

CD return rates change a lot depending on the economy, inflation, and
other current trends in the banking sector.[Â³]{.mark} Average CD rates
have been steadily declining for around the past forty years as the
value of the US Dollar steadily declines.[â´]{.mark} With that said, you
can usually expect to receive anywhere from half a percent to a little
over two percent return per year on today's average CDs.[âµ]{.mark}
Therefore, if you put in \$100, you will get \$100 and an extra dollar
or two back in interest. These rates used to be higher and they used to
be lower.[â´]{.mark}

Now, the thing about CDs is inflation on average is two percent a
year.[â¶]{.mark} This number has been sporadic in the past, but the last
few decades have averaged out the inflation rate to two
percent.[â¶]{.mark} Additionally, the Federal Reserve now targets a two
percent inflation rate.[â·]{.mark} So, every year when your money sits in
your bank account, you usually get paid around 0.01 percent or so to let
the bank loan and invest your money at substantially higher
rates.[â¸]{.mark} While your money sits around, you lose two percent of
your purchasing power every single year because the government prints
away two percent of the US Dollar's purchasing power. This means that,
every single year, the same dollar is worth two percent less than it was
the year prior even though it has the same face value. By not having
your money in assets making you money, your money sits around losing
purchasing power every year.

Bonds are a medium risk investment that are great for diversification,
but bad at making you much money. Although there are many different
types of bonds to invest in, most of them only pay you about four to
five percent annual returns for your money, about two to three percent
after inflation.[â¹]{.mark} Some sought-after bonds pay much more than
this, and they can serve as good, safe investments for you if the
company issuing the bonds is reputable. To get a bond, you loan a
company money to spend on internal improvements, corporate investments,
etc. The company then pays the money back to you over a predetermined
amount of time with a certain return per year, half-year, month, etc.
depending on the bond issuer. At the end of the payback period, you
finally recoup your initial investment plus all earned
interest.[Â¹â°]{.mark} Bonds are less risky than stocks because the only
way to lose money with a bond is if the borrowing business stops paying
the bond which can only happen if they go bankrupt (even then, sale of
corporate assets goes to paying bondholders in bankruptcy court with
other creditors, and companies can issue secured bonds with asset
collateralâµâ°). Therefore, if you lend to reputable businesses, bonds are
usually medium-risk investments that yield you medium returns.

A special kind of bond to look out for is a convertible bond. Companies
that issue convertible bonds usually pay lower bond return rates
compared to their normal bonds, but these bonds can be converted to
shares of a company's stock at a future date for a predetermined number
of shares.Â¹Â¹ You can use a convertible bond to start with a lower-risk
investment and then have the option in the future to cash in on gains if
a company's stock price rises significantly.

Another special kind of bond to know about is a Treasury bond. These
assets are also called Treasury bills and Treasury notes depending on
their maturity length.Â¹Â³ Treasury bonds are issued by the United States
to anyone who wants to buy them directly online via TreasuryDirect or
through a brokerage account.[Â¹Â²]{.mark} When you buy a Treasury bond,
you select a period of time that you will lock your money up in the
bond.[Â¹Â²]{.mark} Just like a CD, the longer you leave your money with
the Treasury, the higher percent return you can expect from your bond.
Finally, Treasury bonds are CDFI Bond Guarantee securities, meaning that
the government guarantees them just like financial institutions
guaranteeing CDs.Â¹â´ Because of their similar risk level to CDs, Treasury
bonds usually offer you lower rates than corporate bonds. The U.S.
Department of the Treasury constantly changes Treasury bonds' returns
according to how they think the rates should change according to the
economy.Â¹Â³

Unlike CDs, Treasury bond returns are exempt from state and local income
taxes.[Â¹â¶]{.mark} Additionally, you can sell your Treasury bonds on
secondary markets at any time to liquidize your position with no
early-withdrawal fees. However, your bonds may lose much of their value
in a secondary market if newly-issued Treasury bonds offer increased
returns (more on this in Secret #22).[Â¹â·]{.mark} Nonetheless, you can
still hold your bonds until maturity, receiving semi-annual interest
payments from the Treasury.[Â¹â¹]{.mark} Because of the tax benefits of
Treasury bonds, comparing them to CD rates is unfair because CDs
generally offer taxable interest-income returns that are fairly similar
to Treasury bonds.[Â¹â¸]{.mark} Treasury bond rates have been historically
volatile, but returns for the past decade average out to pay you about
one to three percent annually pre-inflation.[Â²â°]{.mark}

Treasury Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS), Series I bonds, and
Series EE bonds offer you guaranteed returns on top of
inflation.[Â²Â¹]{.mark} [Â²â¹ Â³Â¹]{.mark} They all function similarly to
Treasury bonds, but they generally offer lower returns because of their
decreased risk.

TIPS pay their interest-rate coupons semiannually just like Treasury
bonds, but the actual face value of the bond (that interest is paid on)
increases each half-year depending on inflation, measured by the
Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers.Â²Â² [Â²â´]{.mark} [Â²â¸]{.mark}
For the last decade or so, TIPS have paid around one percent or less on
top of inflation per annum.[Â²Â³ You may even see negative interest rates
in exchange for protection against inflation, through you can simply
avoid buying TIPS when rates are extremely low, as you lock your fixed
rate in (plus inflation or minus deflation) when you purchase the
bond.Â²â¶ Â²â· Note that inflation increases in principal are taxable for
the year in which they occur.Â²âµ All interest and gains are exempt from
state and local taxes.Â²âµ]{.mark}

[Series I bonds are like TIPS but they do not pay interest coupons,
acting rather as zero-coupon bonds (which we will talk more about in
Secret #22).Â²â¹ You buy into a set return rate when you commit to the
non-marketable Series I bond plus a variable inflation rate, both of
which are added biannually to the redemption value of the bond.Â²â· Unlike
TIPS, you will not lose interest if deflation occurs.Â³â° You can pay
federal taxes on capital gains exclusively at redemption date or
annually on unrealized gains as you bond gains value over time.Â²â· Â²â¹ You
can only purchase \$10,000 of these bonds per year per Social Security
number.Â³Â² Interest returns on top of inflation over the past decade
range from 0 to 0.7 percent.Â³Â³]{.mark} Unlike TIPS which are adjusted
monthly for inflation or deflation, Series I bonds cannot lose value and
will always pay at least the earning interest rate.[Â²â· Â³â°]{.mark}

[Series EE bonds currently yield 0.1 percent annually (added monthly and
compounded semiannually, 2018), but they differ from most investment
bonds in that it only really makes sense to buy them for extremely long
time periods.Â³â¶ We will look more at bond specifically for
diversification soon, but the key with Series EE bonds is that the
government guarantees that your bond will double in future dollars after
20 years (a 3.526 annual percent return before inflation).Â³â´ Â³âµ The
Treasury simply makes a one-time capital-gain adjustment at the 20 year
anniversary of the bond\'s issue date to make up the difference between
the initially-agreed-upon interest rate and twice the bond purchase
price.Â³â· So, a \$100 investment, assuming a constant two percent
inflation rate, turns into a federally-guaranteed \$133.52 in today's
dollars after 20 years (\$200]{.mark}$\bullet$[0.98^20^]{.mark}).
Similar to Series I bonds, you can choose to pay federal taxes
exclusively on interest income and possible capital gains each year or
at redemption.[Â³â´]{.mark}

The last special kind of bond to know about are municipal bonds. You can
purchase these bonds from state and local governments to finance local
government projects. In return for your money, you will not pay federal
taxes and most state and local taxes on your earned interest.Â¹â¶

The last low-return investment to know about is money market accounts or
funds. Money market accounts and funds are usually managed by banks,
credit unions, and other financial institutions.Â³â¸ These managers invest
your money into any combination of short-term low-risk assets listed
previously to gain returns.[â´â°]{.mark} Money market accounts are FDIC
insured, but money market funds are not.[Â³â¹]{.mark} Because of their
general illiquidity in low-risk investments, money market accounts
generally carry minimum required balances for managers to invest.â´Â¹
However, you can still withdraw your cash from these accounts at any
time.[â´Â²]{.mark} Money market account and fund returns used to be much
higher when CD rates and savings rates were higher.â´ However, in the
past decade, returns generally pay you around 0.5 to two percent
annually, depending heavily on the account or fund manager. These
accounts are great if you want to earn a little more interest on money
that you might immediately need (e.g. part of your rainy day fund)
without locking up your money in a bond or risking a short-term stock
decline.[â´Â¹ â´Â³]{.mark}

Now that the low-return markets are out of the way, let's jump into our
best friend, the stock market. When you buy stock in a company, you now
own part of that company. This happens because the company you invest in
decided to issue shares or parts of the company on a public market to
raise capital. Now, you can buy these shares from a previous shareholder
and their value will change over time depending on the public perception
of the company.[â´â´]{.mark} The value of your portion of the company
changes based on what other people are willing to pay for it in the
market[; price movement depends on how market buyers and sellers react
to financial reports, breaking news, industry movements, and
more]{.mark}.

The Standard & Poor\'s 500 Index is a weighted index of some of the
largest 500 companies in the stock market. We will talk more about
indices in Secret #16, but the important thing to know about this fund
is that it covers eighty percent of the market's total capitalization
(i.e. money!) and is used as a comprehensive baseline for measuring US
market performance.[â´âµ]{.mark} The average return for this collection of
stocks is around nine to eleven percent a year, which goes down to seven
to nine percent after inflation.[â´â¶]{.mark} [â´â·]{.mark} On the
conservative end, a fully-diversified stock market portfolio based on
the S&P 500 Index should make you a seven percent post-inflation cash
return in the long-term.[â´â¸]{.mark}

Seven percent is a big number for just parking your money in the
American economy. All you have to do is earn your return in the long run
is send your money into an account that invests in everyday companies
and \*BAM\* your money grows more the longer you leave it in the
economy! Market crashes, huge run-ups, and long periods of stability all
happen in the market, but, in the end, the market and your investments
continue to grow because the companies behind your stocks make more
money to fuel your portfolio.

Now, I do not know your income or your wealth, but I do know that
compound interest can help anyone no matter their income. Let's say you
are fresh out of high school at 18 years old and you get a paycheck
every month for X much money. Assuming you make a living at some kind of
work, let's say you find room in your carefully planned budget to invest
\$417 a month, adding up to \$5,004 a year. Now, let's assume that you
earn the same amount of money for the rest of your life. I know that
rarely happens, but I want to emphasize this example by assuming that
you can only put away \$417 a month every month until the
government-defined retirement age of 66 (soon to be 67).â´â¹ To compensate
for this unchanged contribution amount, let\'s add a seed investment
fund of \$5,004 to put in at the very beginning of your investment
lifetime. From 18 to 67, you have 48 years to let your money earn you
more money and grow. Keep in mind, once you put your money into this
sort of investment account, you are completely hands-off. You can check
your balances as much as you want, but you leave everything in funds
(which we will discuss in Secret #17) and never touch your money once
you put it in. So, you invest \$5,004 a year after an initial \$5,004
investment every year for 48 years, your whole working life! First of
all, that commitment is a feat in and of itself. With that said, let's
first look at a visual representation of how your money will grow from
the average stock market return of seven percent after inflation.

![](media/image2.jpg){width="4.75in" height="3.17in"}

Ignore the numbers to the left for just a moment and look at the above
curve we created. I am sure you know that what you are seeing is the
compounding effect. At the beginning of your investing career, your
account grew at a much lower rate while you kept funding it. Then, as
your money started to earn more money, your account started to grow
faster because your newly realized gains get reinvested back into your
portfolio while you continue to add to it. This leads your account to
grow faster than ever before because now your new money earns you more
money alongside the money you put in previously in addition to the money
you contribute on top of everything else! In the example we set up,
contributing just \$5,004 a year after a \$5,004 initial investment, our
ending retirement account at 66 turned out to contain \$2,020,254.44!
Remember, that two million figure is in today's money, calculated with
today's purchasing power. In reality, a nine percent annual return would
show a real future cash balance of \$4,045,488.23. Moreover, you only
put in \$5,004$\bullet$`<!-- -->`{=html}49=\$245,196 to get this money.

The following work shows the basic compounding idea behind our
portfolio's massive growth in numbers with an average market return
adjusted for inflation. We turn this growth principle into an equation
in the next chapter.

$$age\ 18,\ (\$ 5,004\ initial\ investment\  + \ \$ 5,004\ total\ annual\ contributions) \bullet 1.07 = \$ 10,708.56$$

$$age\ 19,\ (\$ 10,708.56 + \$ 5,004) \bullet 1.07 = \$ 16,812.44\ invested$$

$$age\ 20,\ (\$ 16,812.44 + \$ 5,004) \bullet 1.07 = \$ 23,343.69\ invested$$

$$...repeated\ until\ age\ 66 = \$ 2,020,254.44\ in\ today's\ purchasing\ power$$

As your money grows, its earnings continue to add to your capital base
each year, further growing as you accumulate more interest to create
massive long-term growth. Remember, to achieve these gains, you never
have to work nine-to-noon or learn any of the technical skills talked
about in Part Two of this book. All you do to realize these gains is
work hard at your occupation, put a little away every month, and enjoy
your life while the capitalism-fueled American economy works hard to
grow your money for you (we will explore long-term low-management
investing in Secrets #16 and #17).

Now that we have made you a millionaire (if you were not already one),
let's step back and look at the three main factors behind building your
investment wealth alongside some important concepts to remember.

##  Mastering Fundamentals for Investment Success

Considering that you decided to pick up a book about the stock market
and read it, I am confident that you can become a millionaire (if you
are not already one). Being a millionaire becomes incredibly simple with
consistent dedication, doing the same thing over and over, year after
year. When you keep buying paper assets over time, the money you earn
from those assets makes it difficult to be poor! By the time your wealth
starts compounding at rapid rates, you cannot help but keep making more
money.

The three main factors behind growing your long-term portfolio are:

-   Cash invested,

    -   Depends on your career, lifestyle spending, and investing
        habits.

-   Percent return received, and

    -   Depends on overall economic market performance and how much time
        you invest in trading to beat market returns.

-   Time

    -   Everyone has twenty-four hours in a day.

The amount of money most people invest in the market usually depends on
their income. Now, I am not here to tell you how to budget your life,
which coffee shop to skip in the morning, or how much money you should
give away every year. Additionally, I do not know how you can make
yourself more money by working either for yourself or someone else. The
responsibility of budgeting and increasing your income rests on your
shoulders. You can make as much money through investments as you want,
and it is up to you to put away the amount of money you want to meet
your retirement goals, the maximum amount of money you can physically
invest in America, or a mix between the two.

To see if you are on track to meet your goals, look up an online
"compound interest calculator" or use the following formula (which
assumes annual additions at the beginning of each year rather than
monthly contributions) with your current investment amounts.

> $$initial\ investment \bullet (1.07)^{years\ until\ retirement}$$
>
> $$+ yearly\ contribution\ total \bullet (1.07^{years\ until\ retirement + 1} - 1.07)$$
>
> $\div .07 = retirement\ balance$ [Â¹]{.mark}

Replace all sevens (representing a seven percent average market return)
in the above equation with nines to get a conservative average estimate
of your retirement balance in actual future dollar amounts after
inflation.

Many rising students go to college to increase their specialized
knowledge and subsequent earning abilities. Because it can be tough to
work, invest, study, and excel in college all at the same time, many
college students do not start investing until they finish their degree
programs. These degrees should allow graduates to earn more money in the
job market, which hopefully allows graduates to contribute more to their
retirement funds! Use your compound-interest calculator to figure out
how much you should invest if you expect to receive the only average
market return. We will talk more about college in Secret #7.

The percent return you receive from your long-term portfolio can be
difficult to increase if you only invest in indices, funds, and more
diversified groups of stocks that we will discuss later. To
significantly increase your percent returns without trading
nine-to-noon, master the trading principles and fundamentals we develop
throughout Part Two and apply them to medium-term swing trade positions
or long-term technical analysis trades. The more you search for trading
opportunities, the more opportunities you will find to beat the average
market return. You can capitalize on opportunities you find in
individual stocks by making your own proactive trades.

The amount of time you have to grow your money is one of the hardest
things to change, but it is one of the most important factors for
long-term portfolio growth with little active management. Investing
early on is one of the best things you can do. If you slack off and
start your \$5,004 per year retirement fund at 26 to retire at 66 with
an initial investment of \$5,004, our two million (current) dollar
retirement fund turns into \$1,143,834.47\![Â²]{.mark} We only removed
eight years from our investing (about 16.66 percent of our initial 48
investing years), but our end retirement balance decreased by about
43.38 percent! The money you save at the beginning of your investing has
the greatest impact on your savings at the end. To show the truth behind
this statement, let's look at three examples.

Billy graduates high school at 18 and starts working immediately. He is
lucky enough to have \$5,004 saved up from summer jobs. He starts a
retirement account and funds it with \$417 a month every month while he
works very hard to bring in enough to provide for himself. He gets
better at his job as time goes by and uses his extra money to support
other ventures. By the time he gets to 66, Billy has never missed a
single investment, and Billy's market positions have performed at the
historical average return. Billy has an account with \$4,045,488.23
inflated dollars (\$2,020,254.44 in current purchasing power).[Â²]{.mark}

Bob goes to college right after high school to get a four-year degree.
Bob works very hard during summers and when he finds time during the
school year to work and make enough money to pay for all his college
expenses. After graduating, Bob excels in his field and manages to put
away \$10,008 a year or \$834 a month with no initial investment since
he used all his spare money to pay for college. He works from age 22 to
66, using raises he receives to fund other ventures. With average
returns, Bob retires with an inflated \$5,252,786.21 (\$2,849,771.10 in
current purchasing power).[Â²]{.mark}

Joe is very smart and loves the criminal justice system. Joe goes to an
undergraduate school for four years after high school and then completes
three years of law school. To fund his schooling, Joe trades
nine-to-noon before his classes and during the summer. After his first
four years of college, Joe takes a gap year to travel the world to
expand his social horizons before attending law school. At age 26, Joe
passes the Bar exam, receives his license, starts working as a lawyer,
and begins saving for his retirement. Joe invests \$20,016 a year or
\$1,668 a month until retirement age with no initial investment because
he used all of his stock profits to pay for his last year of law school.
Under the same market conditions as Billy and Bob, Joe retires with an
inflated \$7,371,729.97 (\$4,275,609.15 in current purchasing
power).[Â²]{.mark}

Billy, Bob, and Joe all have very respectable retirements, but they all
lived very different lives because of the educational paths and careers
they embraced. One very important thing to remember is the importance of
graduating from college without debt. In fact, I would say most people
should avoid all debt entirely unless investing in real estate or
settling down in a home. Student loans, unpaid credit cards, missed car
payments, etc. all compound just like stock appreciation. However,
unlike stocks, these liabilities compound negatively, increasing your
debt by creating more debt with the debt you (may) already have. Living
below your means for a short period of time will help you learn to avoid
debts and maximize early investments in assets. Always eradicate any
debts you unfortunately encounter as quickly as possible, since the
money you use to pay those back could go into your investing account,
building your future up rather than destroying it.

Speaking of living below your means, let's look at one simple example of
spending discretionary income instead of investing it. Let's say you get
a paycheck and eagerly go to the store to buy the newest \$200 pair of
shoes everyone is talking about. I think a better way to look at this
purchase is to ask yourself a simple question. What would that \$200 be
if you put it in the stock market for 35 years? That \$200 could turn
into \$2,135.32 in your retirement fund post-inflation.[Â²]{.mark} With
that investment, you can now buy almost eleven pairs of \$200 shoes in
future money! That is the importance of investing early.

##  The Golden Rules to Wealth

When you buy stocks, you go through brokerages to get them. These
companies connect to the big-name exchanges you hear about all over Wall
Street. We will talk about brokers later, but you should remember one
thing about these corporations: they all have to listen to the SEC. The
SEC is the U.S. Security and Exchange Commission, an independent federal
agency created by the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.[Â¹]{.mark} The SEC
regulates the whole stock market, and they are important because they
set all the rules of trading. You need to remember a few of the SEC's
rules when you are investing or else you risk a frozen brokerage account
or cash liquidity issues. Brokers usually inform you about the most
important SEC rules right before you break them, so you do not have to
worry too much about actually researching them. With that said, there
are two SEC-identified circumstances that many people have trouble with.

The first issues you will run into very quickly if you start active
trading in a cash account are cash liquidation violations, good-faith
violations, and free-ride violations.[Â²]{.mark} These violations occur
in a cash account because the SEC allows one to three days for a stock
trade to clear, payments to settle, and shares to be transferred after a
market trade (three days used to be standard, down from a historic
five-business-day settlement).[Â³]{.mark} In these settlement days, you
will run into serious problems if you try to:

-   Sell shares you recently purchased before payments are cleared by
    the SEC,

-   Make a trade with money from a recent and uncleared sell or short
    trade (see Secret #14), or

-   Cover the cost of a stock by selling it quickly after purchasing it
    to pay for the purchasing trade.

Thankfully, the SEC recently enacted T+2 settlement on most securities
in September 2017, expediting your trading in cash accounts.â´
Nonetheless, you should avoid these three activities anyway, but some
traders incur violations accidentally when trading quickly even though
they will have plenty of cash to fill their orders once their T+3/T+2
balances settle. These violations usually result in long account
restrictions and tons of investigative work that you want to avoid at
all costs.

To avoid this problem, ask your broker to open up a margin account if
you start actively trading short-term or medium-term picks. When you
trade on margin, you trade with the broker's money, essentially creating
trading debt, which you should avoid at all costs. However, if you only
use the margin your broker gives you to pay for trades that you can
afford once all your trades clear, using margin becomes perfectly safe
and lets you avoid tedious and inefficient clearing methods that govern
cash accounts. We will talk more about brokers in Secret #37.

Trading on margin is almost like buying things with a credit card; you
will be fine as long as you only spend the money you have. If you spend
a broker's money on a trade and lose money on the trade, you will owe
the broker any money that you lost just like a normal cash trade.
However, if you lost more than you can pay in your account, then you
will have to deposit more money to pay your debts or else they will grow
with interest.âµ

Significant margin losses happen more easily when you trade with
leverage. If a broker grants you leverage with your margin account, you
will be permitted to trade a certain multiple of your actual account
value with margin-lent money. This increases your trade upside, but it
also allows you to demolish your account with large losses. Trading on
margin and leverage with money you do not have is risky debt business
that should be avoided at all costs. However, trading on non-leveraged
margin is almost required for active trading and lets you get the best
fills and quickest orders possible. Just trade like you are trading with
a cash account, and margin trading will be your best friend.

The last SEC rule you ought remember is the PDT rule. You are marked as
a pattern day trader if you make four or more round-trip buy-and-sell
trades on the same day in five business days (one trading week) with an
account worth less than \$25,000 in equity.[â¶]{.mark} Positions you hold
for over one day do not count as round-trip trades and do not count
towards your five-day limit.[â¶]{.mark} You will face PDT restrictions
anytime your account net liquidation value falls under \$25,000, and
your account can get frozen after multiple violations of the
rule.[â·]{.mark} To avoid these punishments, remember to count your day
trades when you are first growing your account. Long-term investors need
not worry about this rule.

##  The Ultimate Retirement Fund Playbook

The SEC also regulates retirement investing accounts. As a quick
reference, here is a brief summary of the Internal Revenue Service's
most popular current tax-preferred investing accounts.

Individual Retirement Account (IRA)

> Who can open?
>
> Individuals
>
> Contribution limits?
>
> Change yearly. Currently significantly lower than 401(k) Plan limits.
> If you are over fifty, you can make additional contributions.
>
> Investment limitations?
>
> You can invest in stocks, bonds, CDs, mutual funds, ETFs, commodities,
> and other investment funds (we will discuss these more in Secrets #17,
> #18, and #22).
>
> Tax benefits?
>
> You can put money into this account from earned income without paying
> tax on it. You only pay taxes once you retire and start taking money
> out of the account! We will talk more about tax implications in a
> second.
>
> Maturity date?
>
> Retirement age

Â¹ Â² Â³ â´ âµ â¹

Roth IRA

> Same as IRA, but you pay taxes on your earned income before you invest
> it. You pay no taxes once you sell your positions in retirement.
> Essentially, your money grows and your profits are never taxed. You
> can effectively contribute more to a Roth IRA because after-tax
> dollars are worth more than pre-tax dollars. These accounts are ideal
> for young adults in low tax brackets or anyone else with post-tax
> cash, and they are the only individual trading account you can open
> independently as a minor (see UGMA and UTMA accounts later for joint
> accounts). If you think you will be in a higher tax bracket when you
> retire, this account can decrease your overall tax liability.

âµ â¶ â· â¸ â¹ âµâ°

401(k) Plan

> Who can open?
>
> Employers
>
> Contribution limits?
>
> Change yearly. Currently one of the highest out of all plans.
>
> If you are over fifty, you can make additional contributions. Some
> employers will match or partially match your investment contributions.
>
> Investment limitations?
>
> You can only hold investment choices made by your employer. This can
> severely limit your personalized investing and individual stock
> trading. However, most employers supply market-tracking funds that
> will historically follow the market and mimic its long-term returns.
> Investment limitations depend a lot on your employer.
>
> Tax benefits?
>
> You can put money in from earned income without paying tax on it. You
> pay tax when you sell your positions in retirement. Some employers
> match contributions to a 401(k) Plan. This is a terrific benefit and
> you should fully-utilize your plan limits when your employer matches.
>
> Maturity date?
>
> Retirement age

Â¹â° Â¹Â¹ Â¹Â² Â¹Â³ Â¹â´ Â¹âµ

Roth 401(k)

> Same as 401(k) but you pay taxes on earned income that you invest. You
> pay no taxes when you sell your positions in retirement.

Â¹Â³

457(b) Plan

> Very similar to 401(k) in terms of contribution limits, investment
> limitations, tax benefits, and maturity dates. State or local
> governments must establish these plans. If you invest under this plan,
> you will receive the ability to invest more money than 401(k)
> investors can after age fifty. Additionally, this plan allows
> independent contractors that serve the government to participate.

Â¹âµ Â¹â¶ Â¹â·

Roth 457(b)

> 457(b) plan except you pay taxes at the beginning of investing rather
> than during retirement.

Â¹â¹

403(b) Plan

> Very similar to 401(k) in terms of contribution limits, investment
> limitations, tax benefits, and maturity dates. Public schools,
> colleges, universities, churches, or certain tax-exempt charities
> establish these plans. They offer abatements that lower administration
> costs compared to a 401(k). This saved money gives employers more
> funds to match your contributions!

Â²â° Â²Â¹ Â²Â²

Roth 403(b)

> 403(b) plan except tax is collected at the beginning of investing
> rather than during retirement.

Â¹â¹

Simplified Employee Pension Plan (SEP)

> Who can open?
>
> Employers of any size, including self-employed individuals
>
> Contribution limits?
>
> Change yearly. Currently almost triple the 401(k) Plan limit, up to 25
> percent of your compensation (slightly lower percentage for
> self-employed individuals). This plan has no catch-up contribution
> bonus. Employers must pay all SEP plan participants the same income
> percentage compensation.
>
> Investment limitations?
>
> You open a SEP IRA with your bank or other qualified institution which
> then funds employees' traditional IRAs. You can hold your own offered
> investment choices.
>
> Tax benefits?
>
> Put money in from earned income without paying tax on it. Pay tax when
> you sell positions in retirement.
>
> Maturity date?
>
> Retirement age

Â¹âµ Â²Â³ Â²â´ Â²âµ Â²â¶ Â²â·

Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees Plan (SIMPLE IRA)

> This plan is very similar to the 401(k) Plan in terms of tax benefits
> and contribution limits (just slightly lower). Simultaneously, this
> plan resembles the SEP plan in terms of who opens the plan and
> investment limitations. However, the plan has slightly lower
> contribution limits because employers can deduct matching
> contributions. The government aims this plan at smaller employers to
> help you save for retirement. Administrative costs are lower in this
> plan, just like the SEP plan. This gives your employer more money to
> contribute towards you instead of a management firm.

Â¹âµ [Â³â° Â³Â¹]{.mark}

Thrift Savings Plan (TSP)

> Almost identical to a 401(k), but the federal government uses this
> plan.
>
> Allow you to contribute pre-tax income towards your retirement. Use
> them to your advantage to maximize your asset growth.

[Â¹â¸ Â²â¸ Â²â¹]{.mark}

Because of the tax benefits of these plans, they usually carry
substantial penalties for withdrawing funds early, punishing those who
take their money out of the economy on a tax-preferred basis before
retirement age.[Â²â¸]{.mark} These penalties are completely removed from
457(b) plans and increased significantly for withdrawals from SIMPLE IRA
plans made within the first two years of investing.Â³Â² Â³Â³ Â³â´ Check with
your account provider to see how these penalties can affect your
investments if you take an "unqualified distribution" from your account.
Often, individuals find that their early-withdrawal fees waived for
immediate emergency expenses, home purchases, and other extenuating
circumstances. Refer to the following IRS chart for a full list of
exemptions to the penalty on early distributions (2018). Note that you
must wait five years to withdraw Roth earnings tax-free.[Â³âµ Remember
that you may still pay income taxes on distributions from taxable
(non-Roth) accounts even when the additionally penalty is
waived.]{.mark}

+:-----------------------------------------+:------------+:------------+
| "Most retirement plan distributions are  |             |             |
| subject to income tax and may be subject |             |             |
| to an additional ten percent tax.        |             |             |
|                                          |             |             |
| Generally, the amounts an individual     |             |             |
| withdraws from an IRA or retirement plan |             |             |
| before reaching age 59Â½ are called       |             |             |
| 'early' or 'premature' distributions.    |             |             |
| Individuals must pay an additional ten   |             |             |
| percent early withdrawal tax unless an   |             |             |
| exception applies."[Â³â¶]{.mark}           |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| The distribution will NOT be subject to  | Exception   |             |
| the ten percent additional early         | to Ten      |             |
| distribution tax in the following        | Percent     |             |
| circumstances:                           | Additional  |             |
|                                          | Tax         |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
|                                          | Qualified   | IRA, SEP,   |
|                                          | Plans       | SIMPLE      |
|                                          |             | IRA,\* and  |
|                                          | (401(k),    | SARSEP      |
|                                          | etc.)       | Plans       |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Age                                      |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| After participant or IRA owner reaches   | Yes         | Yes         |
| age 59Â½                                  |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Automatic Enrollment                     |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Permissive withdrawals from a plan with  | Yes         | Yes for     |
| auto enrollment features                 |             | SIMPLE IRAs |
|                                          |             | and SARSEPs |
|                                          |             | (SARSEP     |
|                                          |             | Plans are   |
|                                          |             | no longer   |
|                                          |             | in          |
|                                          |             | use)        |
|                                          |             | [Â³â·]{.mark} |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Corrective Distributions                 |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Corrective distributions (and associated | Yes         | N/A         |
| earnings) of excess contributions,       |             |             |
| excess aggregate contributions, and      |             |             |
| excess timely deferrals                  |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Death                                    |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| After death of the participant/IRA owner | Yes         | Yes         |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Disability                               |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Total and permanent disability of the    | Yes         | Yes         |
| participant or IRA owner                 |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Domestic Relations                       |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| To an alternate payee under a Qualified  | Yes         | N/A         |
| Domestic Relations Order                 |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Education                                |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Qualified higher education expenses      | No          | Yes         |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Equal Payments                           |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Series of substantially equal payments   | Yes         | Yes         |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Employee Stock Ownership Plans           |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Dividend pass through from an ESOP       | Yes         | N/A         |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Homebuyers                               |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Qualified first-time homebuyers, up to   | No          | Yes         |
| \$10,000                                 |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Legal seizure of your property to        |             |             |
| satisfy a tax debt                       |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Because of an IRS levy of the plan       | Yes         | Yes         |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Medical                                  |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Amount of unreimbursed medical expenses  | Yes         | Yes         |
| (greater than 7.5 percent AGI; ten       |             |             |
| percent if under age 65)                 |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Health insurance premiums paid while     | No          | Yes         |
| unemployed                               |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Military                                 |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| [Certain distributions to qualified      | Yes         | Yes         |
| military reservists called to active     |             |             |
| duty]{.mark}                             |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Returned IRA Contributions               |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| If withdrawn by extended due date of     | N/A         | Yes         |
| return                                   |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Earnings on these returned contributions | N/A         | No          |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Rollovers                                |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| In-plan Roth rollovers or eligible       | Yes         | Yes         |
| distributions contributed to another     |             |             |
| retirement plan or IRA within 60 days    |             |             |
| (where you move funds from one plan to   |             |             |
| another for simplicity's sake or perhaps |             |             |
| to a new financial institution for lower |             |             |
| fees and better investment options)      |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| Separation from Service                  |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| The employee separates from service      | Yes         | No          |
| during or after the year the employee    |             |             |
| reaches age fifty-five (age fifty for    |             |             |
| public safety employees of a state, or   |             |             |
| political subdivision of a state, in a   |             |             |
| governmental defined benefit plan)\*\*   |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| "Nonqualified 457(b) plans: Governmental |             |             |
| 457(b) distributions are not subject to  |             |             |
| the ten percent additional tax except    |             |             |
| for distributions attributable to        |             |             |
| rollovers from another type of plan or   |             |             |
| IRA."                                    |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| \*SIMPLE IRA distributions incur a 25    |             |             |
| percent additional tax instead of ten    |             |             |
| percent if made within the first two     |             |             |
| years of participation                   |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+
| \*\*Qualified public safety employees:   |             |             |
|                                          |             |             |
| The exception for public safety          |             |             |
| employees who are age fifty or over      |             |             |
| includes specified federal law           |             |             |
| enforcement officers, customs and border |             |             |
| protection officers, federal             |             |             |
| firefighters, and federal air traffic    |             |             |
| controllers. An exemption is allowed for |             |             |
| distributions from defined contribution  |             |             |
| plans or other types of governmental     |             |             |
| plans, such as the TSP.                  |             |             |
+------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+

[Â³â¶]{.mark}

[Despite all of these penalty-free reasons to withdraw from your
retirement account(s) early, remember why you establish these plans:
long-term growth. Try to only invest long-term funds that you know you
will not need until retirement.]{.mark}

The Universal Gifts to Minors Act (UGMA) and Universal Transfers to
Minors Act (UTMA) allow you to start investing jointly with your parents
as a minor.[Â³â¸]{.mark} These accounts can be great for minors if you do
not have earned income, you exceed your Roth IRA contribution limit, or
you plan to spend your money in the short-term to medium-term. Remember,
you can withdraw contributions early tax and penalty-free from a Roth
while saving for an overarching retirement, but the point of UGMAs and
UTMAs is to leave the money to grow until the minor reaches transfer age
(discussed soon).

In a UGMA account, a minor and their parent can jointly hold securities
and cash. At the maturity age of the minor, all of the cash and assets
in the account transfer to the minor.[Â³â¸]{.mark} These accounts offer
slight tax advantages but are generally taxed like normal investment
accounts. However, for investors just starting off, these tax advantages
give a great opportunity for you to start practicing your
investing.[Â³â¹]{.mark} Currently, the first \$1,050 in gains that you
realize in this account per annum are tax-free.[â´â°]{.mark} The next
\$1,050 are taxed at your capital gains tax rate as the
minor.[â´â°]{.mark} This tax rate, as discussed earlier, is usually low
because of most children\'s relatively low earned incomes. After the
first \$2,100 in gains per year, your account's unearned income is taxed
at the higher of your parent's tax rate and yours.[â´Â¹]{.mark}

UTMA accounts are very similar to UGMA accounts except for the more
diverse range of assets they can hold and their maturity age, an age set
by the state an account is opened in that determined when the assets
transfer from a custodial to a beneficiary.â´Â¹ UTMA accounts can hold
securities, cash, patents, real estate, fine art, and other
assets.[Â³â¸]{.mark}

For stock-market investing, these two accounts will both hold the same
paper assets. However, the irrevocable transfer of funds and assets from
these accounts to their minor beneficiaries occurs at different time
periods depending on where you live and establish your account, as shown
by this state-by-state chart (updated early 2016, please check with your
local institutions):[Â³â¸]{.mark}

  ------------------------ --------------- --------------- ----------------------- --------------- ---------------
  [State]{.mark}           [UGMA]{.mark}   [UTMA]{.mark}   [State]{.mark}          [UGMA]{.mark}   [UTMA]{.mark}

  [Alabama]{.mark}         [19]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [Missouri]{.mark}       [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Alaska]{.mark}          [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [Montana]{.mark}        [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Arizona]{.mark}         [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [Nebraska]{.mark}       [19]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Arkansas]{.mark}        [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [Nevada]{.mark}         [18]{.mark}     [18]{.mark}

  [California]{.mark}      [18]{.mark}     [18]{.mark}     [New Hampshire]{.mark}  [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Colorado]{.mark}        [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [New Jersey]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Connecticut]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [New Mexico]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Delaware]{.mark}        [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [New York]{.mark}       [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [District of             [18]{.mark}     [18]{.mark}     [North Carolina]{.mark} [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}
  Columbia]{.mark}                                                                                 

  [Florida]{.mark}         [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [North Dakota]{.mark}   [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Georgia]{.mark}         [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [Ohio]{.mark}           [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Guam & Virgin           [21]{.mark}     [N/A]{.mark}    [Oklahoma]{.mark}       [21]{.mark}     [18]{.mark}
  Islands]{.mark}                                                                                  

  [Hawaii]{.mark}          [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [Oregon]{.mark}         [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Idaho]{.mark}           [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [Pennsylvania]{.mark}   [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Illinois]{.mark}        [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [Rhode Island]{.mark}   [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Indiana]{.mark}         [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [South Carolina]{.mark} [18]{.mark}     [N/A]{.mark}

  [Iowa]{.mark}            [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [South Dakota]{.mark}   [18]{.mark}     [18]{.mark}

  [Kansas]{.mark}          [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [Tennessee]{.mark}      [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Kentucky]{.mark}        [21]{.mark}     [18]{.mark}     [Texas]{.mark}          [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Louisiana]{.mark}       [18]{.mark}     [18]{.mark}     [Utah]{.mark}           [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Maine]{.mark}           [21]{.mark}     [18]{.mark}     [Vermont]{.mark}        [18]{.mark}     [N/A]{.mark}

  [Maryland]{.mark}        [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [Virginia]{.mark}       [18]{.mark}     [18]{.mark}

  [Massachusetts]{.mark}   [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [Washington]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Michigan]{.mark}        [18]{.mark}     [18]{.mark}     [West Virginia]{.mark}  [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Minnesota]{.mark}       [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [Wisconsin]{.mark}      [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}

  [Mississippi]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}     [Wyoming]{.mark}        [18]{.mark}     [21]{.mark}
  ------------------------ --------------- --------------- ----------------------- --------------- ---------------

[â´Â²]{.mark}

Note that boxes marked with N/A may be states that do not allow for UGMA
or UTMA accounts. Almost all states will allow at least one of these
account types. As an investing minor, check with your local regulations,
and try to open an account that will mature when you turn eighteen, the
age when you can open a normal brokerage account, or put excess money
into a Roth IRA or other retirement account. Since most parents outearn
their young children, they are subject to a much higher capital gains
tax rate that you do not want to pay after your first \$2,100 in gains
per year.

When you start investing in a UGMA or UTMA account as a minor, you give
your parents post-tax money to invest for you under their name. Because
this money and any assets you purchase transfer to your name when you
come of age, you may have unfavorable financial aid considerations when
applying to colleges (see Secret #7). Additionally, your parent may owe
gift taxes on your portfolio if its total value exceeds the yearly gift
tax allowance (see Secret #7).[â´Â³]{.mark}

When you invest in ordinary brokerage accounts, you use post-income-tax
cash. When you make profits in normal trading accounts, the government
taxes the money you make. The tax rate on these gains depends on how
long you hold your positions and your income. If you hold a position for
less than a year (buy-to-sell ownership period), then you will pay the
higher short-term capital gains tax rate. If you hold a position for
over a year, then you will pay lower long-term capital gains taxes.
These tax rates change each year, and they increase as your gross income
reaches certain tax bracket levels. These two tax rates have
historically been significantly lower than income tax rates.[â´â´
â´âµ]{.mark}

In any of the normal retirement accounts we just talked about, you do
not have to pay income, Social Security, or Medicare taxes on your
initial investments since they come out of your pre-tax pay. You can use
this to your advantage if you think you will be in a lower tax bracket
when you retire compared to while you work. However, you pay income tax
on both long-term and short-term final distributions in
retirement.[â´â¶]{.mark}

Income tax rates, no matter your tax bracket, are substantially higher
than long-term capital gains tax rates.[â´â´ â´âµ]{.mark} However, similar
taxes on short-term capital gains slightly close the gap between the
income tax rate and long-term-capital-gains-tax rate (we will elaborate
on this tax similarity in Secret #20).â´â· Just remember that you have to
pay income taxes on all of your distributed funds in a retirement
account rather than just the capital-gains taxes on gains in a
traditional account.[Â²â¸ â´â¶]{.mark}

With Roth retirement accounts, you pay no taxes on gains or initial
principle when you withdraw cash for retirement. You can fund these
accounts with post-tax income just like normal accounts.[Â¹â¹ â´â¸]{.mark}

Remember that you can buy and sell any positions you can trade in a
retirement account without worrying about paying taxes when you make
money. You only pay taxes when you withdraw your cash.[â´â·]{.mark} This
means that you can actively trade in these accounts without having to
worry about taxes until you retire. The only limitation to trading in
retirement accounts is that the IRS usually prohibits you from having
short positions (we will talk about shorting in Secret #14).[â´â¹]{.mark}

Retirement accounts are great if you are worried that you will be
tempted to take some of your profits out before retirement. These
accounts force you to follow the rules of disciplined long-term
investing for fear of paying early withdrawal fees. In addition, you can
easily set up automatic account contribution with your employers to
guarantee that you put away enough money every paycheck.

Alternatively, retirement accounts limit your financial liquidity in
case you want to rebalance your portfolio into an emerging sector that
you cannot access in your retirement account (direct real estate,
cryptocurrencies, business ventures, individual stocks in some
circumstances, and more).

The best thing you can do for your financial future is to put your money
into assets. If you own a lot of assets, then you will find it very
tough to not be rich. If you buy lots of liabilities, then being poor is
really easy. The stubborn market pays you more and more through
dividends and long-term capital appreciation when you own assets. Let
it.

##  Hatching Tax-Free Educational Nest Eggs

College-savings plans help you pay for higher education by using
tax-advantaged asset growth to compound your college fund over time. For
students and parents alike, the five main tax-abated college-savings
plans to remember are UGMA accounts, UTMA accounts, 529 College Savings
Plans, 529 Prepaid Tuition Plans, and Coverdell Education Savings
Accounts.

To save for college, some parents open UGMA or UTMA accounts for their
children when they are still young. These parents can invest their own
money into assets that will grow as their children grow up. As we talked
about earlier, these accounts only offer tax advantages up to the first
few thousand dollars in annual gains, gains that are taxed at the
minor's capital gains tax rate which is almost always lower than the
custodian's tax rate since your child rarely outearns you in their
teenage years. Afterwards, these accounts act as normal brokerage
accounts used solely for the benefit of the child. Any money withdrawn
from the account must be spent on something that directly benefits the
account's minor.[Â¹]{.mark} Additionally, the minor can spend the money
in the account on anything once they mature and receive ownership of the
account.[Â²]{.mark} These accounts are called Universal "Gifts" and
Universal "Transfers" to Minors Acts. Parents who put money in these
accounts are giving their children money down the road. Moreover, you
cannot change the beneficiary of a UGMA or UTMA account.[Â³]{.mark}

Since parents can withdraw money from UGMA or UTMA accounts at any time
for the benefit of the minor, you can always invest a little money in an
account to save on your taxes for the first few thousand dollars your
account makes. As your child nears college age, you can safely withdraw
the account funds and put them into any other college-savings plan
directed at the minor.[â´]{.mark}

Why would you want to keep money away from minors as they near college
age and UGMA or UTMA account transfer age? Aside from transferring large
sums of money to young children who may not be the best wealth managers
(at least before reading this book), UGMA and UTMA accounts
significantly hurt childrens' financial aid prospects.[âµ]{.mark} Any
money or assets in UGMA or UTMA accounts at any age are considered the
student's property.[â¶]{.mark}

The Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) is the baseline
application for college aid among incoming freshman. This application
gives students access to free federal college aid and is sent to
individual schools to determine scholarship awards.[â·]{.mark} In the
FAFSA, a distinct division is made between student and parent
assets.[â¸]{.mark} UGMA and UTMA accounts are seen as student assets,
whereas other college-savings plans are parent assets.[â¸]{.mark} All the
qualified tax-deferred retirement plans we talked about in Secret #6 are
not considered by the FAFSA and are exempt from aid calculations (IRAs,
401(k)s, etc.).[â¹]{.mark}

The FAFSA and other college aid programs look at student and parent
income and assets. FAFSA parental income expected contribution brackets
range from twenty-two percent to forty-seven percent of available income
minus allowances, with significant financial aid available to low-income
or multi-college-student households.[Â¹â°]{.mark} The FAFSA student income
expected contribution rate is a flat fifty percent after an asset
protection allowance that shelters dependent student income.[Â¹Â¹]{.mark}
Need-based work-study programs are not included in this income (2018
allocation rates).[Â¹Â²]{.mark}

On top of income, the U.S. Department of Education currently expects
students to use twenty percent of their invested assets and saved cash
to pay for college. Parents are only expected to pay 5.64 percent at
most after an asset protection allowance that almost always lowers your
expected contribution.[Â¹Â²]{.mark} Therefore, students with UGMA or UTMA
accounts funded by parents can expect to receive significantly less
financial aid because of UGMA or UTMA account balances that increase
your Expected Family Contribution (EFC).[Â¹Â¹]{.mark}

If you have already funded a UGMA or UTMA account as a parent, empty out
your account one or two years ahead of when the minor will be a
high-school senior completing the FAFSA to increase your available
federal and institutional financial aid.[â¶]{.mark} You can empty out a
parent-funded UGMA or UTMA account into another college planning such as
a 529 Plan for your child well before they approach college age to
prevent scholarship committees from seeing bulk withdrawals as a clumsy
attempt to qualify for more aid.[Â¹Â³]{.mark} Additionally, some states
prohibit you from closing UGMA or UTMA accounts just before maturity
age.[Â²]{.mark}

Finally, remember that UGMA and UTMA accounts are generally filed on a
minor's tax return, and children must sign their return with
you.[Â¹â´]{.mark} However, you can elect to report an account on a
parent's return if a child is under nineteen or a full-time student
under twenty-four at the end of the tax year and their only income is
unearned by filing Form 8814.[Â³]{.mark}

529 College Savings Plans (or simply 529 Plans), like Roth IRAs, offer
tax-free asset growth for expected higher-education costs.[Â¹âµ]{.mark}
However, unlike Roth accounts, 529 Plans are included in FAFSA EFC
calculations since they are expected to be used for college
expenses.[Â¹â¶]{.mark} However, these plans' expected contributions are
calculated at the lower parental allocation rate capped at a maximum of
5.64 percent rather than a flat twenty percent for student assets in
UGMA, UTMA, or personal accounts (2018 rates).[Â¹â·]{.mark} Investing in
529 Plans offers tax-advantaged asset growth that can be used to
directly pay for student expenses without adversely affecting aid more
than traditional investment accounts.[Â¹â¶]{.mark} Investment-savvy
students who open 529 Plans before college or for later graduate school
in their own name can still take advantage of tax-free asset growth,
though they will contribute assets at their higher FAFSA investment
allocation rate, lowering potential financial aid.[Â¹â¸]{.mark}

529 College Savings Plans are set up with states and qualified
investment institutions, and they make sense for almost anyone planning
for college or a family member's college. You can invest in any state
529 Plan, although most states offer local tax incentives varying from
state income deductions and income-tax exemptions for investing in local
529 Plans.[Â¹â¹]{.mark} Check with your state to see how they handle
529-Plan contributions. You could receive state income tax deductions
for contributing to your child's 529 Plan or even your grandchild's 529
Plan.[Â¹â¹]{.mark} Remember that one child can have as many 529 Plans as
you want, so you can set up a deductible parent account alongside a
deductible grandparent plan to maximize local state income deductions
and college investing.[Â²â°]{.mark}

529 Plans are managed like 401(k)s, as discussed earlier, with set
investment options and funds managed by "professionals."[Â²Â¹]{.mark} You
can decide which fund option to invest in and change your fund twice a
year with most plans, but remember that your options are limited to the
options given by the 529 Plan.[Â²Â²]{.mark} Look around for the best state
or institutional 529 Plan to fit your needs. Most fund managers adjust
your portfolio risk levels depending on when the intended beneficiary
begins college, decreasing overall risk as college nears.[Â²Â³]{.mark}

When creating an account, you can name anyone of any age, including
yourself, as the beneficiary of a 529 Plan.[Â²â´]{.mark} Unlike UGMA and
UTMA accounts, you can change the beneficiary of a 529 Plan at any time
by changing the Taxpayer Identification Number in the 529
Plan.[Â²âµ]{.mark} This flexibility not only allows you to transfer a
college fund to a new child when little Johnny decides not to go to
college but also allows you to start an account in your own name and
transfer it to an expected child once they are born and given a Social
Security Number.[Â²â¶]{.mark}

All eligible family members that can receive a 529 Plan transfer without
triggering a non-qualified withdrawal are the designated beneficiary's

-   Child,

-   Natural or legally adopted children,

-   Parents or ancestors of parents,

-   Siblings or step-siblings,

-   Stepchildren,

-   Stepparents,

-   Nieces or nephews,

-   Aunts or uncles,

-   The spouse of any of the individuals listed above,

-   Spouse,

-   First cousin, or

-   Any individual for whom the home of the designated beneficiary is
    their primary home for the entire tax year.[Â¹âµ Â²â·]{.mark}

Note that money spent on non-school expenses is also treated as
non-qualified withdrawals that are taxed with federal, state, and local
income taxes alongside a ten percent federal penalty on
earnings.[Â²â¸]{.mark} If you have extra money in an account after
completing college and do not plan to attend graduate school, then
consider transferring the account to another qualified family
member.[Â²â¹]{.mark} If you do not want to transfer the account to another
family member, you can also roll your 529 account investments into
another 529 Plan but not a Coverdell ESA (we will talk about this plan
soon).[Â³â°]{.mark} You can use these new plans to invest in your future
children's college costs using long-term compounding. Otherwise, feel
free to cash your money out of a tax-free-growth account after spending
a big chunk on college with a small penalty (plus income taxes)
considering your tax-free, re-investable asset realized gains and
dividend income.[Â³Â²]{.mark}

Remember that tax-free scholarships, Pell grants, tax-free employer
education assistance programs, and Lifetime Learning Credits awarded to
students allow you to withdraw up to the aid amount without paying the
ten percent penalty.[Â³Â¹]{.mark} Additionally, you will pay no taxes when
withdrawing contributions in this scenario, only paying income taxes on
any gains which, as we talked about earlier, are generally higher than
capital gains taxes from traditional gains.[Â³Â³]{.mark} Long story short,
use 529 Plans to pay for college and graduate school. Your Plan can
strictly pay for tuition and fees, room and board, books and supplies,
special services, and even computers and related equipment.[Â³Â¹]{.mark}
For students living off-campus but still enrolled half-time or more,
room and board withdrawals from a 529 Plan that exceed campus housing
costs are non-qualified withdrawals.[Â³â´]{.mark}

529 Prepaid Plans are the forgotten little brother of 529 College
Savings Plans.[Â³Â²]{.mark} Prepaid Plans are only offered by a handful of
states and private institutions today because of their low popularity,
flexibility, and returns compared to 529 College Savings
Plans.[Â³âµ]{.mark} State-Sponsored Prepaid Plans let in-state residents
prepay part or all of an in-state school's future tuition and mandatory
fees at the current price, almost like an option or futures contract for
tuition (we will talk about these financial tools in Secrets #18 and
#21).[Â³â¶]{.mark} The Private College 529 plan, the only 529 plan not run
by a state, allows you to lock in tuition and mandatory fee prices with
a large group of nearly 300 diverse schools.[Â³â·]{.mark}

If you prepay into a plan, but your child attends an out-of-state,
private, or otherwise unqualified institution, then plans usually award
you either the amount you contributed to the prepaid tuition plan, your
contributions plus a laughably small amount of interest (up to two
percent for the Private College 529 Plan as of 2018), or the equivalent
value of a state plan based on average applicable tuition rates that you
can use to pay for other schools.[Â³â¶ Â³â¸]{.mark} [Â³â¹]{.mark} This last
option gives you the flexibility to invest into a safer plan even if you
worry that your (possibly very young) children may not go to a
plan-specified state school, but you will likely pay the difference
between in and out-of-state tuition rates if a plan offers this option.
Check with your local plans to see how they handle plan withdrawals and
unused credits.

With 529 Prepaid Plans, you can purchase credits with bulk or
installment payments that cover the future cost of a public state
college year, unit percentage credits that cover a percent cost of a
future state college year, or universal vouchers from the Private
College 529 Plan that cover a differing tuition percentages depending on
each participating institution.[â´â° â´Â¹ â´Â²]{.mark}

Individual states may either guarantee their sponsored Prepaid Plans
with the full force of the state or not guarantee them at
all.[â´Â³]{.mark} In guaranteed plans, the state will bail out investors
and fulfill their promised credits even if the state's plan
underperforms and cannot cover its promised returns. In
[unguaranteed]{.mark} plans, investors risk losing value in their
prepaid credits if a state fund cannot pay for rising tuition costs with
market returns.[â´â´]{.mark} For example, an in-state credit may be
prepaid for a full year or say \$12,000 in tuition. However, a state
fund may have underperformed in the period in question and only left
pre-paying participants with \$8,000 to spend. Guaranteed plans use
state funds to supplement this difference, whereas unguaranteed plans
would leave you to pay extra for your prepaid tuition.[â´âµ]{.mark}

When examining available state plans stick with state-backed plans to
guarantee higher education when you prepay. The Private College 529
Plan's member institutions guarantee the prepaid plan.[â´â°]{.mark}

Remember, 529 Prepaid Plans only cover tuition; students must still pay
for room and board, textbooks, computers, and other related educational
expenses, expenses easily paid for with tax-free asset growth in 529
College Savings Plans.

Like 529 College Savings Plans, 529 Prepaid Plans can only have one
beneficiary, a beneficiary that you can easily change to another member
of the beneficiary's family (limited by the generation-skipping tax
which we will talk about soon).[â´â¶]{.mark}

If you expect college prices to grow significantly more than the stock
market in the coming years, then prepaid savings accounts can be a great
way to lock in or hedge a tuition price for your future college student.
Let's look at historical college inflation to see if 529 Prepaid Plans
make sense for you.

![Points scored](media/image3.png){width="4.75in" height="3.14in"}

From highest to lowest final percent value, we see the Average Annual
NASDAQ Composite Return from '85 to '18, Average Annual S&P 500 Return
from '85 to '18, Private Nonprofit Four-Year College Inflation, Public
Four-Year College Inflation, and Inflation.

![\*Index Fund Performance, Annual Percent
Changes](media/image4.png){width="4.75in" height="2.94in"}

[â´â¹ âµâ°]{.mark}

[From highest to lowest final percent value, we see the NASDAQ Composite
and S&P 500.]{.mark}

^â ^ College inflation data from The College Board's publically released
metrics. Rates reflect national average annual price changes in tuition
and fees plus room and board in the given year's dollar. Tuition and
mandatory-fee inflation alone averages 0.3 percent higher for private
four-year schools and around one percent higher for public four-year
schools in this time period compared to the reported tuition and fees
plus room and board inflation rates. Note that public two-year
institutions had significantly more volatile tuition and fee
inflation-rate changes during this time period, and these changes
averaged out to just under six percent annual increases.[â´â¸]{.mark}

\*\*Inflation calculated using CPI, the Consumer Price Index. This
common measure of inflation tracks the purchasing power of the US Dollar
by calculating the cost of a common basket of everyday goods. The
government uses monthly-calculated price changes in this basket of goods
to track US Dollar inflation. Data in this chart looks at percent
changed in the fourth quarter CPI price of any year given compared to
the previous year's fourth-quarter index price.[â´â·]{.mark}

No doubt, educational costs rise faster than general consumer goods as
demand for schooling steadily increases over time. However, does this
increased cost warrant prepaid tuition? You can see that effective
college inflation, hovering around an average of 5.5 percent per annum
for both public and private schools, stands significantly above US
Dollar inflation. Subtract an average 2.6 inflation rate from this time
range (from chart), and you realize around a three percent average
tuition increase accounting for inflation. Remember, our conservative
long-term S&P 500 return is nine percent before inflation and seven
percent after current inflation rates.

College inflation almost never historically increases more than major,
diversified US index funds, the basis of 529 College Savings Plans.[â´â·
â´â¸]{.mark} In the long term, stock market investing in truly valuable
companies allows you to earn more future money to spend on all college
costs rather than prepaying tuition to hedge against college inflation.

With that said, there are some uses for Prepaid Plans. Stock investments
are inherently volatile, as shown in the second graph. As a student
nears college age, you can lower your overall short-term portfolio risk
by turning towards prepaid tuition plans. At this later stage of
schooling, students may start thinking about where they want to go to
college, so you can prepay for tuition at a prospective university with
confidence. Many investors utilize Prepaid Plans alongside corporate
bonds at the end of a students' primary schooling to offset the risk of
a portfolio downturn after significant long-term growth.âµÂ¹ Often, the
realized prepaid college tuition gains from college inflation in the
last few years of 529 investing yield higher returns than similarly safe
corporate bonds.âµÂ² Prepaid tuition plans should not be the long-term
basis of most well-planned portfolios because of their lower overall
return on capital compared to market indices, but they can act as safe
investments that decrease your overall portfolio risk as college
approaches and you want to actually spend your money.âµÂ¹

Remember, Prepaid Plans are not available everywhere, and many restrict
when you can purchase tuition credits. Research state plans or the
Private College 529 Plan if they make sense for your prospective
schools. See if your prospective plan imposes a student age limit for
prepaid tuition. Try to sell off assets to purchase prepaid credits only
when the market is up and you can take significant long-term gains.

Coverdell Education Savings Accounts (ESAs) are the last primary
tax-advantaged investment account that utilizes compound interest to
help you pay for education.[âµÂ³]{.mark} With a Coverdell ESA:

-   Your money grows tax-free as long as you use it pay for qualified
    educational expenses,

-   You can pay for primary and secondary school expenses (e.g. private
    school) unlike college-only 529 Plans,

-   Your contributions are not tax-deductible like some state 529 Plan
    investment tax incentives,

-   Your account must be opened before its beneficiary turns eighteen
    (no age requirements for 529 Plans),

-   You must spend or withdraw the full account balance or roll the
    account onto a new beneficiary before the original beneficiary turns
    thirty,

-   Beneficiaries can only receive \$2,000 in contributions per year for
    all of their Coverdell accounts (excess contributions are currently
    hit with a six percent penalty),

-   Contributions can be invested in virtually any stock, bond, or fund
    (ESAs are administered financial institutions, not states),

-   Contribution limits are much lower than 529 Plans limits (529 Plan
    contribution limits vary by state and plan provider, but are often
    hundreds of thousands of dollars. We will further explore these
    contributions and gift-tax consequences soon), and

-   Your individual Modified Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI) must be below
    a constantly-changing threshold.

[^15\ 54\ 55\ 56\ 57\ 58\ 59^]{.mark}

You can follow these steps to calculate your MAGI:

1.  Take your Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) on your latest 1040(x) tax
    return. This is essentially your sum income less deductions. (We
    will talk more about tax forms in Secret #8)

    i.  Form 1040 AGI is on line 37

    ii. Form 1040A AGI is on line 21

    iii. Form 1040EZ AGI is on line 4

> (2017 line numbers. Different form types are phasing out in 2018. See
> Secret #8)[â¶Â¹]{.mark}

2.  Add your tax-exempt interest income to this figure (e.g. municipal
    or federal bonds, as we mentioned earlier)

3.  Add your Individual Retirement Account contributions

4.  Add in any excluded-income portions of Social Security benefits

5.  Tack on any tax-free foreign earned income and earned income
    exclusions

6.  Add any other tax-return-specific deductions such as

    i.  Student loan interest

    ii. Tuition and fee expense deductions

    iii. One-half of self-employment tax

    iv. Passive loss or passive income

    v.  Section 137 exclusions for adoption expenses

    vi. Rental loss deductions

    vii. Health Savings Account Contributions

    viii. Any overall loss from a publicly traded partnership

â¶Â² [â¶Â³ â¶â´]{.mark}

Your MAGI is your AGI plus any deductions or tax-free gross income, and
it changes every year as you make more and more money with assets.
However, unrealized gains will not change your MAGI.

Beneficiaries of a Coverdell ESA can receive contributions from parents,
grandparents, other relatives, friends, organizations, corporations, and
themselves.âµâ· Family members contributing to an ESA must have an
individual or joint MAGI below certain changing thresholds.âµâ´ As of
2018, you cannot contribute to an ESA if your MAGI exceeds \$110,000
individually or \$220,000 jointly.â¶âµ Note that the amount you can
contribute to a beneficiary decreases from the maximum \$2,000 per annum
as you near these income thresholds. Corporate or organizational ESA
donors are not subject to income limits.

Coverdell ESAs do not have preventative contribution limitations like
Roth IRAs which require the investor to have earned income to contribute
to an account.[â¶â°]{.mark} Some investors above the income threshold
workaround tax laws by gifting their children \$2,000 which the children
in turn invests into their ESA on their own behalf since they are below
the income threshold.â¶â· Keep in mind that these contributions must still
be made with post-tax dollars no matter their source.âµâµ

Coverdell ESAs can be transferred to new beneficiaries at any time.â¶â·
Since control remains in the hands of the account administrator, ESAs
are treated as parental assets just like 529 Plans on the FAFSA, and
investments contribute to a student's Expected Family Contribution at
the lower parental asset allocation rate.â¶â¸ If students finish their
higher education with money leftover in a Coverdell ESA, they can either
transfer the account to another qualified family member (same as 529
Plan family members) or withdraw the remaining balance. Account managers
can easily change the beneficiaries of Coverdell ESAs without requiring
a full funds withdrawal and rollover.â¶â° Remember, any non-qualified
earnings withdrawals are subject to income taxes plus a ten percent
penalty, mimicking the penalty for Roth IRA unqualified earnings
withdrawals.â¶â¹ [âµâ¹]{.mark} Qualified tax-free Coverdell ESA withdrawals
cover the same expenses as 529 Plans plus K--12 variations of such
expenses.Â¹âµ

Although they carry significantly lower contribution limits compared to
529 Plans, Coverdell ESAs can be a great way to save for a private
primary education and later college expenses. You can spend traditional
529 College Savings Plans on private primary educations. However, 529
Plans are limited to spending \$10,000 a year on tuition and other
required fees only. However, you can spend ESAs on K--12 tuition,
tutoring, special learning services, books, supplies, equipment,
computers, internet access, and other possibly-required expenses such as
room and board, uniforms, transportation, and more.â·Â³

Note that you have until April fifteenth after the end of any year to
make a contribution to a Coverdell ESA for that tax year just as with
Individual Retirement Accounts.â·â° â·Â¹ Any additional contributions over
the \$2,000 per person limit will be taxed at a six percent excess tax
unless withdrawn from the account by June first.â·Â² Additionally, you can
rollover ESA funds into a 529 Plan without penalties.â·â´

Coverdell ESAs use compound tax-deferred asset growth to send your child
through private primary school, high school, and college. However,
always ensure that you have ample college savings before starting a 529
Plan or Coverdell ESA to pay for private K--12 schooling (keep
prioritized college and secondary K--12 school funds separate if
possible).

The flexibility you receive with self-directed ESA investments allows
you to utilize the technical analysis skills you will learn later in
this book to outperform most fund-based 529 Plans with your own stock
trades. Although you might not receive state or local contribution tax
incentives, you should consider Coverdell Education Savings Accounts as
part of your overall college-investing plan.

Savings plans for college gift money to growing children to invest in
their educational futures. Because of this, you should remember estate,
gift, and generation-skipping tax laws to avoid unnecessary taxes.

You pay estate taxes on assets transferred after your death if you
exceed your exemption. Every American gets an estate tax exclusion of
\$11,180,000 (2018 amount) from the assets they leave their
family.[â·â¶]{.mark} The estate tax allows for unlimited deductions for
transfers to a surviving spouse and to charities, including unrealized
capital gains. Once a stock or other asset is transferred due to a
death, the asset's price basis for the newfound owner is its value on
the day of distribution, thereby giving unrealized gains to
beneficiaries without taxes (e.g. you buy a stock for \$50 and it is
transferred post-mortem to your spouse at \$100 who immediately sells
it, attaining no capital gains taxes).[â·âµ]{.mark}

The government taxes extra assets or cash above your exemption and
deductions left to your family according to the following 2018 table:

+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| > Taxable       | > Rate          | > Taxable       | > Rate          |
| > Estate/Gift   |                 | > Estate/Gift   |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| > \$0 --        | > 18%           | > \$100,001 --  | > 30%           |
| > \$10,000      |                 | > \$150,000     |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| > \$10,001 --   | > 20%           | > \$150,001 --  | > 32%           |
| > \$20,000      |                 | > \$250,000     |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| > \$20,001 --   | > 22%           | > \$250,001 --  | > 34%           |
| > \$40,000      |                 | > \$500,000     |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| > \$40,001 --   | > 24%           | > \$500,001 --  | > 37%           |
| > \$60,000      |                 | > \$750,000     |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| > \$60,001 --   | > 26%           | > \$750,001 --  | > 39%           |
| > \$80,000      |                 | > \$1,000,000   |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| > \$80,001 --   | > 28%           | > \$1,000,001 + | > 40%           |
| > \$100,000     |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

[â·â¶]{.mark}

You pay gift taxes when you transfer property and assets while living.
You receive a lifetime gift-tax exemption of \$11,180,000 in 2018.
However, this credit is unified with your estate tax
exemption.[â·âµ]{.mark} If married, you can split gifts with your spouse
to minimize gift-tax outputs, and you can make unlimited gift-tax-free
transfers to your spouse (unless your spouse in a noncitizen. In 2018,
the annual exclusion of a non-citizen spouse is \$152,000).[â·â¶]{.mark}
When you make gifts over the yearly gift allowance, the excess deducts
credit from your unified gift and estate tax credit. If that credit
reaches zero, you pay the same tax rates on non-exempt gifts as the
estate tax rates above.[â·â¶]{.mark}

You can give up to \$15,000 a year per gift receiver in 2018 without
deducting from your lifetime combined gift and estate
exemption.[â·â¶]{.mark} Contributions to Coverdell ESAs and 529 Plans
count as gifts and add towards your yearly annual and lifetime
exemption.[â·â·]{.mark} However, the 529 Plan specifically allows you to
make an early five-year lump contribution of \$75,000
(\$15,000$\bullet$`<!-- -->`{=html}5 years) gift-tax free rather than
five yearly contributions provided no other contributions are made in
the five-year prior.[â·â·]{.mark} Married couples can gift up to \$150,000
in a lump-sum or \$30,000 a year since gift limits are individualized.â·â¸

On top of this, cash you pay for tuition and medical expenses is
gift-tax-free as long as you pay directly to a qualifying school or
medical provider.â·â¹ Still, do not fear to contribute extra money towards
college-savings plans because of gift taxes, as you have the overarching
lifetime gift-tax exemption.[â·â¶]{.mark}

You pay the additional generation-skipping tax when you skip a
generation to transfer property and assets for gifts and estates.
Generation-skipping taxes apply to gift and estate transfers to
recipients who are two or more generations younger than the donor.â¸â°
This tax specifically applies to grandparents opening or transferring a
529 Plan or Coverdell ESA to a grandchild. On top of the generation
rule, this tax also applies to wealth transfers made to individuals who
are at least 37.5 years younger than the donor.â¸â° However, you also
receive the same \$11,180,000 per individual (doubled when married and
contributing jointly) generation-skipping tax exemption to buffer your
generation-skipping contributions (2018).[â¸Â¹]{.mark} The additional
generation-skipping tax in 2018 is forty percent.[â¸Â¹]{.mark} You can
avoid this tax by transferring wealth to direct descendants only who can
later pass it down your family through gifts or their estate.

To report gift and generation-skipping taxes, use IRS Form 709. For
estate and generation-skipping taxes, use Form 706. You must only report
gift taxes against your lifetime deduction and possibly pay taxes once
you exceed the annual allowance per individual.[â¸Â²]{.mark} Watch out for
state-specific inheritance and estate taxes. In 2018, twelve states and
the District of Columbia impose an estate tax and six states collect an
inheritance tax.[â¸Â³]{.mark} Estate taxes are calculated based on the
value of an estate, whereas state inheritance taxes are calculated based
on and paid by asset recipients unless a will specifies estate
payment.[â¸â´]{.mark} Some states loosely follow the federal tax rates
while others independently deviate.[â¸Â² Check with your local
institutions to optimize your asset-management plans.]{.mark}

##  How to Cut Through the Tax Maze for Stress-Free Financial Wins

As you accumulate assets and increase your wealth, it is important to
pay the correct amount of taxes and no more. Let's go over some basic
tax form terminology to set up your financial future. Though specific
tax policies change over time, the following tax-minimization principles
ought hold strong.

Form 1040

Who is this for?

> Everyone! This is where you tally your income and deductions to
> calculate how much tax you owe.

Are there variations of this form?

> Form 1040
>
> For everyone. You can itemize deductions and claim all allowable
> credits. This is the longest 1040 at a nimble yet dense two pages.
>
> Form 1040A (Phasing out! 2018 returns will use the 1040 exclusively
> alongside newfound Schedule 1 through 6 supplements in place of the
> full 1040.[Â¹]{.mark})
>
> Simpler version of the 1040 that you can use if your taxable income is
> below \$100,000 (2018). You cannot itemize deductions, but you can
> claim popular tax credits, deduct student loan interest, deduct IRA
> contributions, and more.
>
> Form 1040EZ (Phasing out! 2018 returns will use the 1040 exclusively
> alongside newfound Schedule One through Six supplements in place of
> the full 1040.Â¹ Many taxpayers will not need to file
> schedules.[â´]{.mark})
>
> Simplest version of the 1040 at only one page long. This form is for
> individuals under 65 with a taxable income under \$100,000 and
> interest income under \$1,500 who will not claim any credits or
> itemized deductions besides the Earned Income Credit (we will talk
> more about tax credits and itemized deductions later).

Can I fill out this form?

> Yes! You can download any version of the 1040 directly from the IRS
> online. Most boxes in your tax return explain themselves and walk you
> through calculating your tax liability. Just plug in income as
> reported in some of the following forms and claim your deductions.
> However, each form also has its own respective instructions to help
> you through any complex directions or calculations.
>
> Once you finish the math in your return, you can file it online
> directly to the IRS or mail it to a local individual processing
> center. You can pay taxes with an electronic funds withdrawal, direct
> deposit, credit or debit card, mailed check, or Electronic Federal Tax
> Payment. If you overpay your yearly taxes through withholding or
> estimated tax payments, you can receive your refund through direct
> deposit or mailed check.

Â² [Â³ â´ âµ]{.mark}

Form W-2

Who is this for?

> Everyone! If you have a job, your employer will give you this document
> annually to report your gross income (wages, salaries, tips, etc.)
> alongside any federal-income, state-and-local-income, Social Security,
> and Medicare taxes withheld from your pay. The government also uses
> this form to report nontaxable combat pay.

Are there variations of this form?

> Form W-2G
>
> Used to report certain gambling winnings to ensure taxes are paid on
> them.
>
> Form W-3
>
> This form contains the same information as your W-2. Your employer
> completes and sends the form to the IRS to validate your federal tax
> return.

Can I fill out this form?

> Your employer fills out this form, and you use its information in your
> 1040 return.

â¶ â· â¸ â¹ Â¹â°

Form 1099

> Who is this for?
>
> Everyone! The IRS uses this form to track large payments outside of
> your job alongside payments to independent contractors.
>
> Are there variations of this form?
>
> There are currently twenty 1099 variants. The most common and
> applicable variants are:
>
> Form 1099-DIV
>
> When you receive dividend payments, your broker will send you and the
> IRS this statement every year you earn more than \$10 through dividend
> income (we will talk more about growing your wealth through dividends
> in Secret #15 and beyond). These dividends are included in your
> Adjusted Gross Income.
>
> Form 1099-MISC
>
> If you run a business, you use this general 1099 variant to report
> miscellaneous payments over \$600 to others for non-employee work and
> compensation. You can file this form if you make a large payment to an
> independent contractor for work, but you will generally only receive
> this when someone else pays you.
>
> Form 1099-B
>
> Your brokerage will send you this report yearly to state realized
> (sold) capital gains or losses that you transfer to your 1040
> Supplement Schedule D. This supplement separates your short and
> long-term capital gains to streamline your tax liability calculations.
> Your commodity broker should also send a form 1099-B to you, stating
> marked-to-market unrealized profits and losses from the year's
> commodity contracts.
>
> Form 1099-INT
>
> You will receive this report from any bank, broker-dealer, government,
> or other institution that pays you over \$10 in interest income. This
> income could come from bond interest, checking and savings account
> interest, Treasury bills, and more. As stated earlier, Treasury bills
> are exempt from state and local federal income tax, whereas municipal
> bonds are exempt from federal income tax alongside state income tax in
> many cases. Aside from these lower-interest-bearing investments, the
> government includes taxable interest income in your Adjusted Gross
> Income. Interest and ordinary dividends from Form 1099-DIV are tallied
> on Form 1040 supplement Schedule B which you can also use to report
> all of your taxable interest and dividends (even when you reinvest
> dividends).
>
> Form 1099-Q
>
> You receive this form at the end of any year you take a distribution
> out of a 529 College Savings Plan or Coverdell ESA. You can match this
> report up with your receipts for qualified educational expenses and
> 1098-T to qualify your withdrawals (we talk about the 1098-T soon). If
> the distribution amounts exceed qualified educational expenses, then
> you must report the excess as "other income" on your 1040.
>
> Form 1099-R
>
> Employer-sponsored retirement plans and other financial institutions
> issue this form to report account rollovers and withdrawals over \$10.
> You receive this report if you withdraw cash from annuities,
> profit-sharing plans, retirement plans, IRAs, insurance contracts, or
> pensions. Institution-direct or
> withdrawn-and-reinvested-within-sixty-days rollovers in a retirement
> plan or IRA are not taxable, whereas retirement-plan distributions,
> IRA distributions, annuities, and more are taxable. 1099-Rs should
> state the amount of a distribution that is taxable along with any
> federal income tax already withheld.
>
> Can I fill out this form?
>
> These forms help ensure Americans pay the right amount of taxes by
> sending both the IRS and you a copy of large payments or some
> investment income to reference when you file your return. You will
> generally only use this form as a reference for when you fill out your
> taxes to ensure you calculate tax liabilities correctly. Since
> businesses issue 1099 forms to both the IRS and you, you need not
> submit your 1099 statements to the IRS.

Â¹Â¹ Â¹Â² Â¹Â³ Â¹â´ Â¹âµ Â¹â¶

Form 1098

> Who is this for?
>
> Everyone! Variations of this form range from reporting mortgage
> interest to donating planes.
>
> Are there variations of this form?
>
> Form 1098
>
> When you make mortgage interest payments of at least \$600 in a given
> year, your financial institution will issue this report. You can use
> this information in your Schedule A to itemized deductions when your
> total itemizable deductions exceed the standard deduction (we will
> talk more about itemizing deductions soon).
>
> Form 1098-T
>
> Your college uses this form to report tuition and other educational
> fees you paid over the year. You can use this to validate your
> qualified college-savings plan distributions and educational credits
> (which we talk about soon).
>
> Form 1098-E
>
> If you receive at least \$600 of student loan interest, then you file
> this form and provide a statement to the borrower.
>
> Form 1098-C
>
> You can use this to account for any tax-deductible donations of motor
> vehicles, boats, and airplanes.
>
> Form 1098-Q
>
> You send this form to the IRS and beneficiary to report when you issue
> a Qualifying Longevity Annuity Contract. This Contract provides
> guaranteed monthly payments until death for elder investors, shielding
> them from stock-market downturns.
>
> Can I fill out this form?
>
> You receive this form from institutions, companies, private
> organizations, etc. as a record of large payments. As an informational
> reference to help you with your return, you neither fill out these
> forms nor send them the IRS.

[Â¹â· Â¹â¸ Â¹â¹ Â²â° Â²Â¹ Â²Â²]{.mark}

Form W-4

> Who is this for?
>
> Everyone! If you get a new job, your employer should ask you to fill
> this form out alongside its local state counterpart.
>
> Are there variations of this form?
>
> Form W-4
>
> This is your "Employee's Withholding Allowance Certificate." It tells
> your employer how much to withhold from your paychecks to pay for your
> federal income taxes. You fill this report and its state equivalents
> with simple information about your personal allowances and deductions
> which you claim on your 1040 return. Simply follow the step-by-step
> instruction in this document to ensure the right amount of tax gets
> withheld from your pay.
>
> Form NC-4, VA-4, M-4, etc. (State W-4 Equivalents)
>
> This tells your employer how much state and local income tax to
> withhold from your paychecks.
>
> Note that some states like Oregon and South Carolina use the Federal
> W-4 form for state taxes. Simply write "STATE" at the top of the
> Federal W-4 when you submit it. For states such as South Dakota and
> Wyoming that do not charge state income taxes, you need not file a
> state W-4 equivalent (2018).
>
> Can I fill out this form?
>
> You fill this form out to help your employer determine how much money
> gets withheld from your paycheck. By accurately completing your W-4,
> your employer should withhold cash from your paycheck that equals your
> federal-income, state-income, local-income, Social Security, and
> Medicare tax liability at the end of the year. If you get a refund,
> then your employer withheld too much and you should alter your yearly
> W-4 and state equivalent. If you pay a tax bill, then your employer
> withheld too little and you should alter your yearly W-4 and state
> equivalent. You can ask your employer to withhold additional taxes
> from your pay in W-4 box six ("additional amount") or Form W-4V so
> that you do not have an unexpected tax bill at the end of the year. If
> you have multiple jobs, ensure that your employer does not withhold
> too much Social Security or Medicare tax from your paychecks. These
> taxes should be withheld at 6.2 percent and 1.45 percent respectively,
> with taxable limits up to \$128,400 (â0.062 tax rate =\$7,960.80
> maximum amount paid) for Social Security taxes and no limit for the
> 1.45 percent Medicare tax (which adds an additional 0.9 percent after
> the first \$200,000 of taxable income). If you have more than
> \$7,960.80 withheld for Social Security from all your jobs, you can
> file Form 843 at the end of the year for a Social-Security overpayment
> refund (2018 maximum and tax percentages).

[Â²Â³ Â²â´ Â²âµ Â²â¶ Â²â·]{.mark}

When you file your 1040 return using electronic free fillable forms with
direct deposit, you are guaranteed the fastest possible processing time
by the IRS.[Â²â¸]{.mark} As of 2018, you can even use free commercial
tax-preparation software from the IRS if your income is below \$66,000
through the e-file program.[Â²â¹]{.mark} You can do your own taxes! The
best way to learn about taxes is to simply follow the IRS instructions
and submit your own return to the best of your ability.

When you file your taxes, you have the option to take a standard
deduction or to itemize deductions against your taxable income. The
standard deduction against income is \$12,000 for individuals, \$18,000
for heads of household, and \$24,000 for married couples filing jointly
and widow(er)s in 2018.[Â³â°]{.mark} If your itemized deductions exceed
the standard deduction, claim them! However, it is much easier and
efficient to take the standard deduction if you do not have any large
itemizable deductions. If you think you will deduct more by itemizing
deductions, use IRS Schedule A to supplement your 1040.[Â³â°]{.mark}
Americans with larger incomes generally itemize deductions more than
others.[Â³Â¹]{.mark} Of those who do itemize, the most popular deductions
are state and local income taxes, mortgage interest, and charitable
contributions.[Â³Â³]{.mark} A 2017 White-House study reported that 90
percent of taxpayers plan to claim the standard deduction.Â³Â² You can
itemize:

-   State and local property taxes (maximum \$10,000 or \$5,000 if
    married filing separately in 2018[Â³â´),]{.mark}

-   Sales taxes or state and local income taxes,

-   Home mortgage interest,

-   Casualty and theft losses due to a federally-declared disaster,

-   Recorded charitable donations,

-   Medical and dental expenses that exceed 7.5 to 10 percent of your
    AGI (percentage changes relatively frequently),

-   Investment interest expenses (e.g. fees and advising services) as
    long as they are lower than investment income, and

-   Miscellaneous deductions---you can deduct the amount of these
    expenses that exceed two percent of your AGI.

    -   Unreimbursed business expenses,

    -   Expenses for uniforms,

    -   Tax preparation fees,

    -   Business use of your home,

    -   Subscriptions to professional journals, and

    -   Job-hunting expenses.

> (Phasing out! Miscellaneous deductions are no longer allowed in
> 2018.Â³â´ This affects you as an investor and strengthens Active Trader
> Status, as we will explore in Secret #20.)

[Â³Â³ Â³â´ Â³â¶ Â³â·]{.mark}

In addition to the standard deduction, you may qualify for the
refundable Earned Income Credit (EIC). The amount of the EIC depends on
your taxable earned income and number of children. The EIC's maximum
value in 2018 is:

  ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- -----------------
      Number of                                         
     Qualifying                                         
      Children                                          

        Zero               One               Two          Three or more

        \$519            \$3,461           \$5,716           \$6,431
  ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- -----------------

Â³â¸

The chart below shows the value of the EIC depending on your income and
number of qualifying children. The data uses the 2017 metrics for
maximum refundable credit amounts and income limitations (which we talk
about soon). The percentage phase-ins and phase-outs change the value of
your EIC when your AGI falls outside of the maximum credit income range.
For example, a 45 percent phase-in, increases the value of the credit by
45 cents for every dollar of taxable earned income up to the maximum
credit limit. After passing the income threshold for your maximum
credit, the value of the EIC fades out in the same manner: a 21.06
percent phase-out will decrease the value of the credit by 21.06 cents
for every surplus taxable dollar of earned income.

![](media/image5.png){width="4.75in" height="2.64in"}

[Â³â¹]{.mark}

From highest to lowest maximum EIC, we see three children (or more), two
children, one child, and no children. For married couples filing
jointly, the credit begins to phase out at an income \$5,690 higher than
shown.Â³â¹

To claim the EIC, you must:

-   Have a Social Security number (and your spouse if filing jointly),

-   Claim qualifying children on Form 1040 supplement Schedule EIC (this
    document walks you through reporting your children),

    -   Your children must have Social Security numbers (we will talk
        more about this form and child qualifications soon).

-   Have earned income,

    -   From employers,

    -   Owning a farm, or

    -   Running a business

-   Not file separately if married,

-   Be a US Citizen or resident alien all year,

    -   Exemptions available for nonresident aliens married to US
        citizens or resident aliens

-   Not be another person's qualifying child,

-   Not report foreign earned income through Forms 2555 or 2555 EZ,

-   Have a qualifying child (defined soon), and

    -   Or be at least age 25 but under 65 at the end of the year,

    -   Live in the US for more than half the year, and

    -   Not be a dependent (as defined soon).

-   Have an earned income and AGI lower than the following statistics
    which change based on the number of qualified children you claim.
    Note that these 2018 maximums change each tax year and are simply
    the end of the phaseout period shown in the graph above.

â´â° â´Â¹ â´Â² â´Â³ â´â´ â´âµ â´â¶

+:-----------------:+:---------:+:---------:+:---------:+:---------:+
| Filing            | Q         |           |           |           |
|                   | ualifying |           |           |           |
| Status            | Children  |           |           |           |
|                   | Claimed   |           |           |           |
+-------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
|                   | Zero      | One       | Two       | Three or  |
|                   |           |           |           | more      |
+-------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Single, Head of   | \$15,270  | \$40,320  | \$45,802  | \$49,194  |
| Household, or     |           |           |           |           |
| Widowed           |           |           |           |           |
+-------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Married (Joint)   | \$20,950  | \$46,010  | \$51,492  | \$54,884  |
+-------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

â´â·

In addition to these income limitations, your investment income must be
\$3,500 or less for the tax year (2018 limit).[â´â·]{.mark} Investment
income includes interest payments, dividends, capital gains, and any
other profit made through an investment vehicle that you
realize.[â´Â³]{.mark} Once you start accumulating assets that pay
dividends, this investment income limitation may stop you from claiming
the EIC. However, making more money through assets is good! You can
still claim the EIC in years where you realize few capital gains as long
as you meet the above criteria. This credit can is a great way for you
to lower your initial tax liability while you start accumulating assets,
freeing up more cash to invest.

For reference, a dependent can be:

-   A qualifying child or

-   A qualifying relative (e.g. an older or younger family member that
    you support)

And all dependents must:

-   Be US citizen, a US national, a US resident, or a resident of Canada
    or Mexico;

-   Be claimed as a dependent on only one US tax return per year;

-   File a tax return without claimed dependents; and

-   Not file a joint tax return

Additionally, a qualifying child meets the following qualifications and
is:

-   Age qualifications

    -   Under age nineteen at the end of the year, under your age, and
        under the age of your spouse if filing jointly;

    -   A full-time student during at least five months of the year,
        under age twenty-four at the end of the year, and younger than
        you or your spouse if filing jointly; or

    -   Permanently and totally disabled at any time during the year at
        any age

-   Relationship qualifications

    -   Biological child, stepchild, eligible foster child, adopted
        child, any other child placed with you for legal adoption by an
        authorized adoption agency, or a descendant of any of these
        individuals

> or

-   Your sibling, half-sibling, step-sibling, or a descendant of any of
    these individuals

<!-- -->

-   Residency qualifications

    -   Living with you or your spouse if filing jointly for more than
        half of the year

-   Joint-Return Qualifications

    -   Not filing a joint return or

    -   Only filing a joint return to claim a refund and is not required
        to file

-   Financial Support Qualifications

    -   Parents provide the dependent with financial support equal to or
        greater than half of their annual income.

These qualifications are key for claiming the child tax credit, child
and dependent care credit, educational credits, and more.

^48\ 49\ 50\ 51\ 53^

For both Roth IRAs and the Earned Income Credit, remember that earned
income only includes taxable wages earned from an employer or income
from running a business or farm; your stock dividends and long-term
asset sales do not count.âµÂ² For the EIC, you can choose to include the
entirety of your nontaxable combat pay in your taxable earned income to
claim the EIC if this increases your refund or reduces your tax
liability.[âµÂ³]{.mark} If your spouse also has nontaxable combat pay, you
can both choose which way is best for you.[âµÂ³]{.mark}

As you grow your net worth and dividend income through asset
accumulation and compound interest, this credit may phase out of your
reach. However, it can still help you get off your feet by freeing up
money to invest in the market early on, the best time to invest.

Alongside the Earned Income Credit, you can claim the Saver's Tax Credit
when you contribute to your retirement plans.[âµâ´]{.mark} To qualify for
this great credit, you must:

-   Be eighteen or older,

-   Not be a full-time student, and

-   Not be claimed as another's dependent.[âµâ´]{.mark}

Once you meet these qualifications, simply make contributions any
retirement plan, IRA, 401(k), employer plan, personal ABLE account, etc.
(ABLE accounts allow you to grow your post-tax cash in assets with no
tax on gains as long as proceeds are used to pay for qualified
disability expenses).âµâµ Your contribution must be made in the tax year
that you file for. The maximum credit amount is \$2,000 (\$4,000 if
married filing jointly) directly off your tax bill.[âµâ´]{.mark} You can
calculate your credit by simply multiplying your qualifying
contributions (not rollovers) by your credit rate as determined based on
your Adjusted Gross Income.[âµâ´]{.mark} Remember that retirement-plan
contributions decrease your AGI, too.âµâ¶

  ----------------- ------------------- ----------------- -----------------
  Saver's Tax       [Single, Married    Married Filing    Head of Household
  Credit Rate       Filing Separately,  Jointly (2019)    (2019)
  (2019)            or Qualifying                         
                    Widow(er)]{.mark}                     
                    (2019)                                

  50% of your       AGI less than       AGI less than     AGI less than
  contribution      \$19,250            \$38,500          \$28,875

  20% of your       AGI between         AGI between       AGI between
  contribution      \$19,251 and        \$38,501 and      \$28,876 and
                    \$20,750            \$41,500          \$31,125

  10% of your       AGI between         AGI between       AGI between
  contribution      \$20,751 and        \$41,501 and      \$31,126 and
                    \$32,000            \$64,000          \$48,000

  0% of your        AGI over \$32,000   AGI over \$64,000 AGI over \$48,000
  contribution                                            
  ----------------- ------------------- ----------------- -----------------

âµâ´

If you meet an income limitation above, then the government wants to
help you save for retirement. Use Form 1040 supplement Form 8880 to
calculate your Saver's Credit.âµâ· This can be a great way to free up
extra cash early on to put in pre-tax-paid plans like Roth IRAs or 529
Plans.

The Tuition and Fees Deduction for qualified higher education expenses
is a separate deduction directly from your taxable income even if you
take the standard deduction.[âµâ¸]{.mark} [â¶Â¹]{.mark} If you or your
dependent child pay for college tuition and mandatory fees like
textbooks, you can take a direct deduction up to \$4,000 of such
expenses as long as your MAGI is under \$80,000 (\$160,000 if married
filing jointly) or up to \$2,000 if your MAGI is under \$90,000
(\$180,000 jointly) (2018).[â¶â° â¶Â²]{.mark}

You cannot claim the Tuition and Fees Deduction as well as an education
credit.[âµâ¹]{.mark} Additionally, you cannot take this deduction or
either of the following tax credits if you are a dependent, married
filing separately, or classified as a nonresident alien (we talk about
dependency soon).[âµâ¹]{.mark} The two education credits available are:

1.  The American Opportunity (Tax) Credit (AOTC)

> A maximum annual credit of \$2,500 for qualified educational expenses
> paid for the first four years of higher education.â¶Â³ To claim this
> credit, you, your child, or your spouse must:

-   Be pursuing a degree or other recognized education credential,

-   Be enrolled at least half-time for at least one academic period
    beginning in the tax year,

-   Not have finished the first four years of higher education at the
    beginning of the tax year,

-   Not have claimed the AOTC or the former Hope credit for more than
    four tax years, and

-   Not have a felony drug conviction at the end of the tax year (only
    educational credit or deductions with this requirement).â¶Â³ â¶â´

> You can claim multiple credits for multiple children in college as a
> parent.â¶âµ However, you cannot claim the credit if you are a dependent
> (i.e. you do not get credit for your parents paying for college, but
> you can claim your children).
>
> The American Opportunity Credit value is:
>
> 100 percent of the first \$2,000 of qualified education expenses
>
> plus
>
> 25 percent of the next \$2,000 of qualified education expenses
>
> (=\$2,500 maximum)â¶Â³
>
> Where qualified education expenses are:

-   Tuition,

-   Fees, and

-   Related required fees for enrollment

> but are not:

-   Room and board,

-   Insurance,

-   Medical expenses including student health fees,

-   Transportation, or

-   Similar personal living or family expenses.â¶Â³

> The American Opportunity Credit also uniquely considers books and
> other required supplies and course equipment as a qualified
> educational expense unlike traditional tax definitions and other
> educational credits and deductions. These costs are included in your
> credit calculation no matter who sells the supplies (i.e. you can buy
> a textbook online as a qualified expense).â¶âµ Note that you cannot
> claim this credit at all if your MAGI exceeds \$90,000 individually or
> \$180,000 jointly, and your credit amount gradually decreases as you
> near these thresholds.â¶Â³ You will get a refund of 40 percent of your
> credit (up to \$1,000) if the American Opportunity Credit lowers your
> tax liability below zero.[â¶Â³]{.mark}
>
> and
>
> 2\. The Lifetime Learning Credit

The Lifetime Learning Credit is worth twenty percent of the first
\$10,000 of qualified education expenses paid by you, your spouse, or a
student who you claim as a dependent.[â¶â¶]{.mark} So, the 2018 maximum of
\$2,000 sits \$500 lower than the AOTC's maximum, and you must spend
more than twice as much on tuition, fees, and mandatory expenses for the
non-refundable tax credit. You cannot claim the Lifetime Learning Credit
if your MAGI is above \$66,000 individually or \$132,000 if you are
married filing jointly, and you will receive reduced benefits as you
near this threshold.[â¶â·]{.mark} Additionally, you cannot claim more than
one Lifetime Learning Credit per return.[â¶â¶]{.mark}

The Lifetime Learning Credit is more flexible than the AOTC since it can
be used for all years of post-secondary education and for courses to
acquire or improve job skills rather than the first four years
exclusively (i.e. usable in graduate school).[â¶â¸]{.mark} You are not
required to pursue a degree or other recognized educational credential
for the Lifetime Learning Credit, so you can study industry or
job-specific classes outside of an accredited curriculum-based course
and claim this tax credit.[â¶â·]{.mark} Note that the Tuition and Fees
Deduction can also be used for unlimited years of post-secondary
education, but this deduction requires you to take accredited courses at
federally-recognized institutions.

Use IRS Form 8863 to claim these two educational credits or Form 8917 to
claim the Tuition and Fees Deduction.âµâ¹ â¶â¹ Both of these Forms
compliment your 1040.

However, the IRS will not let you spend 529 Plan or Coverdell ESA
distributions on these tax credits or deduction; the same expenses
cannot be used for two tax savings.â¶â¶ To qualify for a tax credit or
deduction, you must spend money outside of a college-savings plan on
qualified educational expenses.â¶â· Let's look at a quick example to make
sure you get the most out of your college-savings plans and tax
deductions.

The following statistics come from Harvard University's published 2018
to 2019 expected cost of attendance:

+---------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| Tuition                                     | \$46,340               |
+=============================================+========================+
| Fees                                        | \$4,080                |
+---------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| Room                                        | \$10,609               |
+---------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| Board                                       | \$6,551                |
+---------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| Estimated personal expenses                 | \$4,070                |
|                                             |                        |
| (including \$800 to \$1,200 for books)      |                        |
+---------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| Estimated travel costs                      | \$0 to \$5,000         |
+---------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| Health insurance (unless you are covered    | \$3,364                |
| under your family\'s health plan)           |                        |
+---------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| Sum (no travel costs)                       | \$75,014               |
+---------------------------------------------+------------------------+

[â·â°]{.mark}

Now that you are in Harvard, let's look at how you can pay for your
education. Let's say your parents (or you!) contributed to both a 529
College Savings Plan and a Coverdell ESA. If your account is
significantly overfunded and can easily pay for four years of college,
congratulations! You may not want to claim educational credits or
tuition deductions at all, as you cannot spend tax-benefited
college-fund investments on qualified educational expenses for credits
or deductions. You can claim a credit or deduction only if you spend
other cash from either income, savings, or other normally-taxed assets.
This is your ideal scenario wherein you put enough of your money into
assets that in turn, over the long run, pay for your full college cost.

If you are in this scenario, consider the taxes you can avoid by
following a college budget (coming up soon) wherein you spend
normally-taxed cash or investments on tuition to claim deductions which
could outweigh 529 Plan unqualified distribution penalties and income
taxes by lowering your annual tax liabilities. If you know that you will
have an extra \$16,000 in a 529 Plan by the time your child finishes
college, then you can take a \$4,000 distribution from the account every
year and claim the Tuition and Fees Deduction (or American Opportunity
Credit if you have multiple children in college, increasing your overall
yearly tax savings, as we will explore soon).

The IRS waives the ten percent penalty if you do claim these credits or
deductions, only charging you income taxes on earnings.[â·Â¹]{.mark}
However, you could avoid these taxes altogether by paying for one
child's entire education and then rolling over an account to another
child, thereby allowing your investments to continue growing tax-free to
pay for your next child's college. Nonetheless, please do not let fear
of fees stop you from contributing more than \$250 a month to your
child's college fund as long as you balance your investments across your
other retirement funds and savings-goal assets (or more than \$363.33
adjusted for inflation, as we talk about soon).

\$300,056 (\$75,014$\bullet$`<!-- -->`{=html}4 years) is a lot of money
to pay assuming you get no financial aid scholarships. Let's say you put
\$250 away a month for your child, totaling \$3,000 a year, from the day
your child is born to the time they reach 18 and finish high school.
Since you know that your kid is the best, you also decide to deposit an
initial investment of \$3,000 in your child's future early on so that
the principal can have the most time possible to compound value. In the
earlier graph comparing college inflation, inflation, and US market
index performance, we see that the average inflation over the
thirty-four cited years for private non-profit four-year schools is 5.45
percent and 5.45588 percent for public four-year schools.[â·Â²]{.mark}
Knowing this, you decide to put your \$250 monthly investments and
initial \$3,000 deposit into a NASDAQ-Composite-tracking ETF which
averaged a 13.9097 percent return during this thirty-four-year period
(we will talk about ETFs in Secret #17).

However, you slowly moved some of your money into corporate bonds as
your child went through high school to decrease the risk of your capital
significantly dropping in the market right before you need to spend it.
Because of this intelligent diversification and risk-avoidance, you
decide to move a quarter of your portfolio into bonds that average you a
five percent average return for the remainder of your child's
high-school education every year (twenty-five percent during the first
year, fifty during the second, and so on until you are fully in bonds
during your child's senior year). This is a fairly conservative
portfolio management strategy that many embrace when they fear that the
overall market may be overvalued.[â·Â³]{.mark} You may decide to leave
your investments in riskier stocks if you see significantly higher
potential returns in equities versus corporate bonds or vice versa in
uncertain markets.

Using this strategy, your average predicted return turns out to be
around 13.91 percent for the first fourteen years of NASDAQ investing
and 11.6825, 9.4550, 7.2275, and 5 percent for the last four years. Your
\$250 a month (totaling \$57,000 after eighteen years plus your initial
deposit) turns into \$204,908.21 using the compound interest calculator
or formula from earlier in this book (using percentage numbers from
"College Inflation, Inflation, and US Market Performance" graph in
Secret #7 that looks at the average annual NASDAQ Composite return from
1985 to 2018).â·Â²

Our final portfolio value was calculated assuming minimal long-term
management with exclusively index-tracking investments and yearly
interest compounding. Due to short-term index unpredictability, you can
use yearly compounding to account for monthly downtrend buys and uptrend
buys, averaging short-term monthly gains and losses into an overall
yearly average percent gain (we will talk more about indices in Secret
#16).

Great job! You have just under \$205,000. The College Board lists the
following statistics about the comprehensive 2018 to 2019 yearly cost of
college. These figures include tuition and fees, on-campus room and
board, books and supplies, transportation, and "other expenses" (aka.
everything your terrific 529 Plan and Coverdell ESA will pay for).

-   Four-year private nonprofit college average cost: \$52,500
    ($\bullet$`<!-- -->`{=html}4 years = \$210,000)

-   Four-year public college in-state average cost: \$25,890
    ($\bullet$`<!-- -->`{=html}4 years = \$103,560)

-   Four-year public college out-of-state average cost: \$41,950
    ($\bullet$`<!-- -->`{=html}4 years = \$167,800)[â·Â³]{.mark}

Since we are looking at today's college costs, we must remember that you
saved \$250 in past money in this example. Eighteen years ago, \$250 had
the same buying power as \$363.33 today.â·â´ Therefore, in today's 2018
dollars, you would put away \$363.33 a month or
\$363.33$\bullet$`<!-- -->`{=html}12 months = \$4,359.96 a year for this
same savings plan. As time goes on, the actual purchasing power of the
cash you invest decreases while your earlier investments accrue more
interest. By investing a little over four grand in today's dollars
eighteen years ago, you could now fully pay for an average in-state and
out-of-state public four-year degree and need only pay about \$5,000 for
an average private nonprofit degree.â·Â³

By considering how much college will cost in the future, you can figure
out how much to put away today. Note that transportation and travel,
college supplies, and other expenses included in the above cost figures
are more likely to inflate at the standard Consumer Price Index
inflation rates rather than higher college inflation rates which are
used in the following calculations to extrapolate potential future
college costs.â·âµ However, textbook prices rise significantly faster than
standard inflation.[â·â¶]{.mark} Since professors dictate exactly which
book and volume of said book students need, they artificially allow
publishers to increase prices to absurd levels since students generally
have no choice but to purchase the required texts which are often
updated yearly to keep new books in circulation.â·â· With that said, many
online used-book sellers help students find cheaper textbooks to save on
college costs.

The following calculations use the standard college inflation rate for
expenses beyond tuition, fees, room, and board because of overall
hastened increases in textbook prices but lower increases in other
supplies, transportation, computer technology, and other expenses. Using
the current 5.45 percent average private college inflation rate and
5.45588 percent average public college inflation rate from our Secret #7
graph, we can extrapolate the following future compounding college costs
after eighteen years:

-   Private: \$52,500$\bullet$(1.0545)Â¹â¸ = \$136,457.62
    ($\bullet$`<!-- -->`{=html}4 years = 545,830.48 future 2036 dollars)

-   Public in-state: \$25,890$\bullet$(1.0545588)Â¹â¸ = \$67,360.68
    ($\bullet$`<!-- -->`{=html}4 years = 269,442.72 future 2036 dollars)

-   Public out-of-state: \$41,950$\bullet$(1.0545588)Â¹â¸ = \$109,145.63
    ($\bullet$`<!-- -->`{=html}4 years = 436,582.52 future 2036
    dollars)â·Â³

You may want to recompute these figures with current expected college
costs and inflation rates, data readily available from The College
Board. These calculations assume that college rates in America will keep
rising at their historical rates for the next eighteen years after you
have a child. Many individuals suspect that the United States is in a
higher-education bubble.â·â¸ [â·â¹]{.mark} This macro interpretation of the
American debt-fueled education system argues against students taking on
too much debt to get potentially unworthwhile degrees at abhorrent
prices.[â¸â°]{.mark} However, you need not worry much about debt since you
have around \$205,000 in today's dollars to spend on your child's
college after investing for eighteen years.

Back to Harvard, we see a total projected annual cost of \$75,014 a year
or \$300,056 for four years. You will have to pay \$95,147.79
($\$ 300,056\ cost - \$ 204,908.21\ from\ assets$) for a Harvard degree
assuming we do not invest more cash early on (the best time to invest)
or take riskier, higher-returning investments. To best balance
tax-deferred college-savings investments, tax deductions, tax credits,
personal spending, and student aid, we can follow this spending table:

+:----------:+:---------:+:----------:+:--------:+:-------:+:--------:+
| Paying for |           |            |          |         |          |
| Harvard    |           |            |          |         |          |
+------------+-----------+------------+----------+---------+----------+
|            | Tuition & | Room &     | E        | Travel  | Health   |
|            | Fees      | Board      | stimated | costs   | i        |
|            |           |            | personal | e       | nsurance |
|            | (         | (\$17,160) | expenses | stimate | unless   |
|            | \$50,420) |            | i        | (\$0 to | you are  |
|            |           |            | ncluding | \       | under    |
|            |           |            | \$800 to | $5,000) | your     |
|            |           |            | \$1200   |         | f        |
|            |           |            | for      |         | amily\'s |
|            |           |            | books    |         | health   |
|            |           |            |          |         | plan     |
|            |           |            | (        |         |          |
|            |           |            | \$4,070) |         | (        |
|            |           |            |          |         | \$3,364) |
+------------+-----------+------------+----------+---------+----------+
| Freshman   | Pay       | Pay        | Pay      | Varies  | Pay      |
| Year       | \$46,420  | \$17,160   | about    | for     | \$3,364  |
|            | from 529  | from 529   | \$2,070  | di      | from     |
| \$65,650   | Plan or   | Plan or    | or more  | fferent | savings, |
| spent from | ESA       | ESA        | from 529 | s       | as this  |
| college    |           |            | Plan or  | tudents | is not a |
| assets     | Pay       |            | ESA to   |         | q        |
|            | \$4,000   |            | cover    |         | ualified |
| About      | cash and  |            | q        |         | expense  |
| \$9,364    | claim the |            | ualified |         |          |
| spent from | Tuition   |            | expenses |         |          |
| savings,   | and Fees  |            |          |         |          |
| cash, job, | Deduction |            | Pay      |         |          |
| etc.       | or AOTC   |            | \$2,000  |         |          |
|            |           |            | cash for |         |          |
|            |           |            | other    |         |          |
|            |           |            | misc.    |         |          |
|            |           |            | expenses |         |          |
+------------+-----------+------------+----------+---------+----------+
| Sophomore  | Pay       | Pay        | Pay      | Varies  | Pay      |
| Year       | \$46,420  | \$17,160   | \$2,070  | for     | \$3,364  |
|            | from 529  | from 529   | or more  | di      | cash     |
| \$65,650   | Plan or   | Plan or    | from 529 | fferent |          |
| spent from | ESA       | ESA        | Plan or  | s       |          |
| college    |           |            | ESA to   | tudents |          |
| assets     | Pay       |            | cover    |         |          |
|            | \$4,000   |            | q        |         |          |
| \$9,364    | cash and  |            | ualified |         |          |
| spent from | claim the |            | expenses |         |          |
| savings,   | Tuition   |            |          |         |          |
| cash, job, | and Fees  |            | Pay      |         |          |
| etc.       | Deduction |            | \$2,000  |         |          |
|            | or AOTC   |            | cash for |         |          |
|            |           |            | other    |         |          |
|            |           |            | misc.    |         |          |
|            |           |            | expenses |         |          |
+------------+-----------+------------+----------+---------+----------+
| Junior     | Pay       | Pay        | Pay      | Varies  | Pay      |
| Year       | \$46,420  | \          | \$4,070  | for     | \$3,364  |
|            | from 529  | $11,921.07 | cash     | di      | cash     |
| Remaining  | Plan or   |            |          | fferent |          |
| \          | ESA       | From 529   |          | s       |          |
| $58,341.07 |           | Plan or    |          | tudents |          |
| spent from | Pay       | ESA        |          |         |          |
| college    | \$4,000   |            |          |         |          |
| assets     | cash and  | Pay        |          |         |          |
|            | claim the | \$5,238.93 |          |         |          |
| \          | Tuition   | cash       |          |         |          |
| $16,672.93 | and Fees  |            |          |         |          |
| spent from | Deduction |            |          |         |          |
| savings,   | or AOTC   |            |          |         |          |
| cash, job, |           |            |          |         |          |
| etc.       |           |            |          |         |          |
+------------+-----------+------------+----------+---------+----------+
| Senior     | Pay       | Pay        | Pay      | Varies  | Pay      |
| Year       | \$50,420  | \$17,160   | \$4,070  | for     | \$3,364  |
|            | cash and  | cash       | cash     | di      | cash     |
| \$75,014   | claim the |            |          | fferent |          |
| spent from | Tuition   |            |          | s       |          |
| savings,   | and Fees  |            |          | tudents |          |
| cash, job, | Deduction |            |          |         |          |
| etc.       | or AOTC   |            |          |         |          |
+------------+-----------+------------+----------+---------+----------+

For a Harvard degree, you paid \$189,641.07 from your college-savings
plans (in which you deposited only
$\$ 2,640\  + \ \$ 220 \bullet 12\ months \bullet 18\ years\  = \ \$ 50,160$)
and \$110,414.93 from savings, work, etc. assuming no financial aid
whatsoever. You could increase your monthly and initial contributions to
cover this deficit or trade proactively to increase your percent return
through strategies explained in Part Two. We did not adjust for
inflating college costs after freshman year because our unspent college
funds can remain in corporate bonds accruing an average five percent
annual interest. In these bond investments, our funds will rise slightly
above the historical average college-inflation rate with minimal risk
while we wait to pay for the remaining years of college. We will further
explore bonds in Secret #22.

If you have two or more dependent children in college at once, then you
can claim the larger American Opportunity Tax Credit against your tax
liability (owed tax) since you can claim multiple \$2,500 AOTCs when you
spend \$4,000 on tuition unlike the once-per-return Tuition and Fees
Deduction against AGI (income).[â¶â° â¶Â³]{.mark} [â¶âµ â¶â¹]{.mark} Review your
return with both options to see which one works best for you. The
Lifetime Learning Credit is also a once-per-tax-return credit against
your tax liability.[â¶â·]{.mark}

You can pay for anything you want as long as you plan for it. College,
retirements, savings goals, and more are all within your grasp thanks to
the power of the long-term American economy. By planning and investing
in your child's college today, you can give them the best possible start
in their adult lives without debt.

##  Break Free from the Debt Vortex and Unleash Your True Financial Potential

We talked about how debt compounds earlier, but I want you to really
understand how much debt can hurt you.

The conservative average stock market return is nine percent
annually.[Â¹]{.mark} This return lowers to seven percent per annum after
an average inflation rate of two percent.[Â¹]{.mark} With this return,
you can grow your money over time to grow as much wealth as you want.

Debt interest rates vary a lot depending on the economy, Treasury-bond
rates, demand for debt, and much more.Â² At the time of writing,

-   Average student loans for the past decade charge you around four to
    seven percent annual interest.[Â³]{.mark}

-   Credit card interest rates are increasing; the average borrowing
    rate for the past decade is around fifteen to sixteen percent. You
    can expect to see even higher rates as a new card applicant.â´ âµ

-   The average American thirty-year mortgage charges you four to five
    percent annually. Mortgage rates in particular have changed a lot
    over time, significantly decreasing in the past few decades.[â¶
    â·]{.mark}

-   Car loan rates have decreased a lot in the last decade too, now
    charging you around four to five percent annually.â¸ â¹ Â¹â°

-   Average personal loans from financial institutions charge you ten to
    thirty percent annually.Â¹Â¹ [Â¹Â² Â¹Â³]{.mark}

Thirty percent! If you put \$5,004 into an investment account for
thirty-five years that yielded a thirty percent annual return, you would
have \$48,678,213.57\![Â¹â´]{.mark} The massive growth of even the
smallest debts can destroy any hopes you have of putting money away for
investing.

This book is not about how to avoid debt through budgeting or frugality,
but I hope that you now realize the importance of avoiding debt to free
up your money for investing. To figure out how much your debt can really
cost you, use the same compound interest formula or calculator from
earlier in this book using interest rates that apply to you. For most
people, living below your means is much more financially sustainable
than ever taking on debt.

One exception to debt avoidance appears in real estate investments where
you can have debt at four percent and an annual return of ten percent.
In this scenario, you turn your investment into an asset by taking in
enough rent money to cover your mortgage payments, build your equity in
your property, allow for appreciation, etc. so that the money you take
in covers all of your expenses and debt payments.Â¹âµ In these scenarios,
it often makes sense to keep long-term debt even when you can pay it off
because your percent returns on your investment significantly exceed
your mortgage interest rate, and the extra money in your pocket allows
you to reinvest into new assets that outperform your debt.Â¹âµ However, in
financial markets, avoid trading on debt or margin at all costs. Losing
more than you have to bet on a position and indebting yourself to a
broker is as bad as taking out a loan for a Hawaiian vacation (around
ten percent at some brokers).[Â¹â¶]{.mark}

##  A New Financial Frontier Unveiled

Where you go to look at stocks really does not matter too much as long
as you can get the information and charts you need. We will talk more
about the different types of stock charts and key statistics in Secrets
#11 and #15.

Yahoo Finance is great for researching stocks because they give you all
the tools you need to analyze any stock for any type of trading for free
through the online Yahoo Finance website and mobile Yahoo Finance
application. However, you cannot enter and exit positions directly
through Yahoo Finance unless you link a real brokerage account to your
Yahoo Finance account (we will talk more about brokerages in Secret
#37).[Â¹]{.mark}

For the rest of this book, we will use Yahoo Finance to develop our
stock trading skills.

Let's pull up a company on Yahoo Finance and look at the initial basics
of stock research.

![](media/image6.png){width="4.75in" height="1.21in"}

[Â²]{.mark}

To find this stock, we can type in this company's full name, NIKE, Inc.,
or we can type this company's ticker, \$NKE (without the dollar sign),
in Yahoo Finance's search bar. All publicly traded companies have
tickers to represent their company in a shorter, unique way.Â³ It is much
easier for you to type in \$CPB for Campbell Soup Company rather than
the full company name.â´ You will learn companies' tickers over time once
you start researching them. Remembering these ticker helps significantly
speed up stock research and short-term trading by keeping you moving
between different stocks rapidly.

The previous snippet was taken during pre-market trading hours. In a
live market day, the price of \$NKE changes constantly because the value
of the stock is the last price an order or transaction occurred at. For
\$NKE, \$80.50 is what the last person paid to buy one share of NIKE,
Inc. on August eighth just before the market closed.[âµ]{.mark}

Next to a company's price per share, you will see a price change in
dollars and a price change in percent change. The price change in
dollars shows how much a stock has moved from the last trading day's
closing price. For \$NKE, the price per share went down three cents on
August eighth compared to August seventh.[Â²]{.mark}

Next to the daily dollar price change, you can see the percent change
for the day, calculated using the company\'s per-share price and dollar
movement. We can see that the three-cent decline in NIKE, Inc.'s share
price brought the value of \$NKE stock down .04 percent from the prior
close, a minute change.[Â²]{.mark} You should care more about percent
changes than dollar price movements in the long-run because percent
change lets you compare stock performances directly to one another. I
would love to invest in a \$20 stock that could go up to \$10, but I
might care less in the short-term about \$400 stock that could rally
\$10.

Stock price does matter less than percent changes when you make trades
because you can just buy as many shares in a company as you want to
reach your desired position value.[â¶]{.mark} Your percent change will
dictate how well your position performs compared to the overall market.
Focus on percent changes, and your overall trading discipline and
subsequent returns ought improve.

Judging positions based on percent change rather than price movements
also helps you become a better trader once you start managing more money
because you will be psychologically conditioned to only look at percent
changes instead of viewing positions as "money lost" or "money gained."
By taking emotion out of your head and looking at percent changes in an
overall position, you will have a much easier time looking at specific
price targets based on facts rather than emotions. Disconnecting
yourself from trades is key to extremely strong active-management
performance. Remember, you want consistent percent gains in your
portfolio over the long run. Never limit yourself to X much money every
year. When your account starts growing, fight for higher percent returns
rather than settling for lower percent returns with higher cash value,
if possible.

Here is a refresher image of our \$NKE quote in case you forgot what we
were talking about.

![](media/image6.png){width="4.75in" height="1.21in"}

[Â²]{.mark}

This snippet was taken at 8:50 AM. The stock market opens every business
day at 9:30 in the morning Eastern Standard Time (New York) and it
closes at four o\'clock EST.[â·]{.mark} Right after the 9:30 opening bell
is usually the most volatile period of the trading day.[â¹]{.mark} This
volatility sets the tone for the rest of the trading day by around 10:00
depending on whether the market moves up or down.

Pre-market trading occurs before 9:30 and after-hours trading takes
place after four o\'clock.[â·]{.mark} Trading outside of market hours is
possible through some brokerage accounts which take extra time and
effort to set up.[â¸]{.mark} In these accounts, you can submit orders
outside of the trading day just like normal orders. However, after-hours
and pre-market trading usually carries much less liquidity than normal
hours because of significantly less trading volume than normal
hours.[â¸]{.mark} This lack of volume also causes much larger bid-ask
spreads which hurts your ability to enter and exit positions at good
prices (we will talk more about the bid-ask spread in Secret
#15).[âµ]{.mark}

Since comparatively few people trade outside of market hours, stocks do
not generally change prices too much after they close for the
day.[â¸]{.mark} However, news, earnings reports, and other catalysts can
all cause large movements in premarket stock prices since these can come
out at any time of the day, triggering buyers and sellers to enter or
exit positions as soon as possible.[Â¹â°]{.mark} Large premarket movements
are especially good indicators for even bigger movement potential in the
following trading day.[Â¹â°]{.mark} These movements, combined with the
initial volatility when the market first opens at 9:30, create stellar
opportunities for nine-to-noon active traders.

As a long-term investor, you can expect to see large premarket movements
in your positions every once and a while when large news comes out about
a company you invested in. These movements will generally carry into
your normal day's gains and losses as if the stock moved during trading
hours.

Every quarter, public companies release their financials to the public,
and you may see large price movements depending on whether a company
beat or missed a predicted earnings expectation, subscriber projection,
etc.[Â¹Â¹]{.mark} Additionally, companies release larger annual reports at
the end of each business year (which may not be the calendar year) that
go into more detail about their operations, strategic growth, and future
outlooks, among other things.[Â¹Â²]{.mark} Reading a company's annual
report will give you superb insight into their potential performance,
and reading quarterly reports will help you continually understand a
company\'s financials (we will look more at companies' annual reports in
Secret #23).Â¹Â³

##  Mastering the Hieroglyphics of Stock Charts

Stock charts are your gateway into technical analysis. Let's jump into
the basics of reading charts and making calls. When you pull up any
stock on Yahoo Finance, you will instantly see a condensed chart. Simply
click "expand graph" to fullscreen the graph (or click the graph in the
Yahoo Finance app). Here is the five-year price line chart for \$HD, The
Home Depot, Inc.

![](media/image7.png){width="4.75in" height="1.86in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

The chart shows the past performance and price changes of \$HD for five
years. You can see the stock's per-share trading price in dollars on the
vertical axis. At the bottom of almost every single stock chart, you
will see time. In this chart, we see labels that span out across five
years. The amount of time your chart covers heavily influences your
trading style. Across the bottom of the chart, we see "D" for dividend,
representing any time when this stock paid dividends to shareholders
(i.e. the company pays you from their earnings to own their stock. We
will further explore dividends in Secret #15).[Â¹]{.mark} Also across the
bottom of this chart, you can see red and green volume bars. These bars
are red when the price decreases from the trading period prior and green
when the price increases.[Â²]{.mark}

As a general rule of thumb, increased volume (how many shares of a stock
are traded in any given period) usually means there is more attention
around a stock, more people getting into a stock, and more people
profiting from a stock as it swings up or down. Volume is almost always
good because it keeps liquidity up and keeps attention on a stock.Â³
Volume usually increases over time because more people enter the market
and see successful stocks. Especially for nine-to-noon trading, you
should gravitate towards stocks with more volume that provide higher
liquidity, making it easier for you to smoothly enter and exit
positions.

Because \$HD has performed very well in the past five years relative to
the S&P 500 (164 percent return vs. 73 percent), you might say that this
stock is on an uptrend, and many investors may buy into the stock in
hopes that its gains continue.[Â¹ â´]{.mark} Another way you can predict
future growth for well-established companies like The Home Depot, Inc.
is by looking into the stock's price history, analyzing its very
long-term performance.[âµ]{.mark}

When you start trading (if you have not already been trading), you will
need more accuracy than a simple line graph. Let's look at a candlestick
chart for \$HD. To switch to this chart in Yahoo Finance, simply click
the drop-down box that says "Line" by default and select "Candle."

![](media/image8.png){width="4.75in" height="1.86in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

Candlesticks are terrific for any kind of charting because they show
stock movement and volatility simultaneously. Each of the candlesticks
in the above chart represents one trading day.[Â¹]{.mark} Green
candlesticks closed higher than they opened for the day, and red
candlesticks closed lower than they opened.[â¶]{.mark} The bottom of each
candlesticks' bottom "wick" is the lowest price \$HD traded at for that
candle's trading day, and the top of the top wick is the highest price
\$HD traded at.[â¶]{.mark} Not all candlesticks have top and bottom wicks
because their minimum and maximum prices are inside the candlestick
body. The candlestick body for green candlesticks starts at the open
price of the candle and ends at the close price for the candle, gaining
value. Red candlesticks' bodies start at the open price and end at the
close price, losing value over the candle's time period.[â¶]{.mark} Open
prices often differ slightly in daily candles from previous days because
of after-hours trading.

For almost any type of trading, you should stick to using candlesticks
to keep your trades informed and accurate. Keep in mind that your charts
may look very slightly different than Yahoo Finance's charts depending
on which brokerage you use and their provided software.

##  Explore the Market Wilderness of Bulls and Bears

Now that you know how to read stock charts, let\'s explore prolonged
market periods which emerge in longer-term charts. To demonstrate these
market conditions, here is a look at the last decade of the S&P 500.

![](media/image9.png){width="4.75in" height="1.85in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

You can see market conditions just by looking at charts. Long run-ups
are called bull markets. In a bull market, you can expect to see more
stocks go up than down as the whole market collectively increases in
value. In our snippet of the S&P, we can see bull market conditions from
2010 to 2015 and mid-2016 to 2018.

Extended downtrends indicate bear markets.[Â²]{.mark} You can see bear
market conditions from 2007 to 2009 when more stocks declined in value
than appreciated, bringing the overall market down.[Â²]{.mark} As a
long-term investor, timing bull and bear markets can be difficult and
sometimes unprofitable for long-term outcomes.[Â³]{.mark} With that said,
you should always be skeptical about the companies you invest in and
ensure that they perform up to your standards as a shareholder.

Constant price stability with no strong movement up or down indicates
sideways markets. We see little price movement across the overall market
from 2015 to 2016, indicating a sideways market where overall stock
values fluctuate but do not move up or down together. For active
traders, sideways markets present many opportunities to buy supports and
sell resistances, as we will explore in Secret #24.

You can quickly start building a long-term portfolio by looking at
brands that you already use in your daily life. Ask yourself which
companies you know of that you think make a killing by providing value
through goods or services to the marketplace. Then, if the company is
public, investigate their financial releases, previous growth, current
management, and future goals.[â´]{.mark}

You should always know a lot about an underlying company if you are
going to hold a stock for ten years or more (outside of an index. See
Secret #16). If you believe in Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. more than
any other company, then a few closed stores will not hurt your long-term
prospects. Remember that some news outlets will summarize major points
in big companies' quarterly reports, 10-Qs, and annual reports, 10-Ks.
With that said, it is still important to recognize where and how much
money flows through a business to determine their long-term potential
and safety as an investment by reviewing individual financial data sheet
releases periodically.[âµ]{.mark} If you commit your time to studying the
operational finances of an individual business, then you can expect
higher returns as your masterfully understand the companies in your
portfolio and avoid potentially-unsustainable companies. Additionally,
financial reports frequently have forward-thinking plans embedded in
them for shareholders.

Aside from exciting sixty-page annual reports, companies will also
invite you to shareholder meetings when you buy their stock. Shareholder
meetings can be held in-person or online, and sometimes you can vote for
what the company should do in the short or medium term at these meetings
after they report some company news.[â¶]{.mark} Shareholder votes are
frequently used to bring in new executives with shareholders'
approval.[â·]{.mark} These meetings let you see how hard companies are
working to bring in profits for their shareholders (aka. you!). Though
none of these meetings are required or even meaningful in some cases,
they show a company's dedication to shareholders. Annual meetings in
particular are major events for companies like [Berkshire Hathaway
Inc.]{.mark} This sort of long-term involvement goes beyond charts and
numbers and lets you look holistically at a company and their stock.

##  Using News to Guide Your Investing Compass

Remember that a stock is priced at what other people think it is
worth.[Â¹]{.mark} If masses of people want to buy a stock because they
get a new patent, its price will increase because sellers in the market
book get filled. If you see a huge price movement in the market, you can
usually expect news behind it.[Â¹ You can use]{.mark} Yahoo Finance to
see news about a stock right under its quote.[Â²]{.mark} A lot of trading
platforms also have some sort of news feed for stocks, and Google always
comes in handy as a last resort. Quickly glancing over news can help you
figure out whether or not a significant price movement is justified.

For cheaper, active stocks, use news as fuel for potential growth and
expect more market buyers like yourself when good news comes out or
sellers when bad news comes out.[â´]{.mark}

For long-term investing, stay aware of news about overall market trends
and economic shifts. With that said, you should always have a long-term
plan going into your investments so that short-term moves and news do
not surprise you too much. However, larger market shifts like the 2001
dot-com bubble and 2008 housing market crash were publicly predicted by
many intelligent investors.âµ [â¶]{.mark} Nonetheless, even
former-Federal-Reserve-chairman Alan Greenspan predicted the NASDAQ
Composite peak over three years and almost 300 percent early in December
of 1996. â¹ Â¹â° Â¹Â¹ Â¹Â²

Listen to news about others' opinions and weigh their perspective
against yours to ensure that you attack the market to the best of your
ability. Ask yourself, "does news anchor X really understand this
market? What is the context behind their opinion?"

You may have to act quickly in volatile markets when news comes out to
enter or exit a position at an optimal time. If this happens, always
stop and tell yourself your reason for entering a position. Then, make
sure the decision you are going to make aligns with your investment
goals and philosophies. A single poor quarterly report for The Home
Depot, Inc. does not mean that everyone suddenly likes Lowe's Companies,
Inc. more. However, Amazon, Inc. seriously entering the home improvement
space could hurt Home Depot in the long run.

You will be fine as long as you stay informed about news but do not
watch too much of it. A great source of news is Yahoo Finance on both
their desktop and mobile platforms. On both free platforms, you can see
stock-specific news by scrolling down beneath a quote.[Â² â·]{.mark} These
stories are timestamped and many large news stories on specific
companies can cause large price swings.[Â²]{.mark} On Yahoo Finance's
mobile platform in particular, you can get real-time updates on the
price, earnings, and news for all the stocks in your watchlists through
notifications.[â· The app also offers the same superb technical analysis
tools available online, which we will explore in Part Two.]{.mark}

For long-term investing, you can use the "maximum" charts to see how
certain stocks have performed over the past fifty years or more for
well-established companies.[Â²]{.mark} Then, you can slowly work your way
down to ten-year, five-year, two-year, one-year, and year-to-date charts
to predict future price movements. Your candlesticks should start out as
weekly candles and eventually become daily candles with this chart-based
price research. By looking at the long-term performance of a company you
already know a little bit about, you can understand the sorts of returns
you can expect from an investment in the company and the risks of the
investment based on previous downtrends.

For active trading, start by looking at long-term charts for historical
supports and resistances (which we talk about in Secret #24) just like a
long-term investor.[â¸]{.mark} Then, zoom in to monthly, daily, and
hourly charts looking for price levels to trade. Finally, for
nine-to-noon trading, use one-minute candles and use your technical
analysis skills to make smart, fast trades (see Part Two).

For long-term and medium-term trades alike, you can use recent price
dips along with other indicators that we will discuss to find good entry
points into new positions. Similarly, you can compare historical highs
to current movements to predict good selling points for medium-term
trades. For long-term trades, consider further investigating the
underlying company and buy them based on your faith in the company and
its marketplace role.

##  Turn Market Downturns into Gold

I am sure you knew before picking up this book that you can buy a stock
when it is "low" and sell it when it is "high." But what about in bear
markets? Or what about when you think a company will lose money because
of a new competitor? What about that one stock that just went up 400
percent? Let me introduce you to shorting stocks.

When you buy and sell a stock, your profit or loss is the difference
between the purchase price and sales price of that stock.[Â¹]{.mark} The
same principles apply to funds and commodities which we will explore in
Secrets #17 and #18. Another name for this kind of investing is "going
long." You go long in most long-term positions and retirement-building
positions because you believe that your positions will go up in the
long-term.[Â¹]{.mark}

When you short a stock, you sell the stock first and then buy your
shares back or "cover" your position.[Â²]{.mark} The difference between
what you sold the stock for and bought it back at is your profit or
loss.[Â²]{.mark}

Brokers almost always require you to have a margin account with them to
issue you stock to borrow, and you might have to specifically ask to
short stocks.[â´]{.mark} When you short sell a stock, you first borrow
stock from your broker and sell it instantly on the open
market.[Â³]{.mark} You receive the funds from your short sale instantly
and owe your broker the number of shares you borrowed.[Â³ â´]{.mark}
Shorting will show up just like any other order option (buy, sell,
stop-limit, etc.) on your trading platform (check with your broker) (see
Secret #19 for order types).[Â³]{.mark} You can continue to borrow
outstanding shares for as long as you want with no penalty as long as
you do not borrow and lose a broker's money on margin. There are no
general rules regarding how long a short sale can last before being
closed out.[âµ]{.mark}

Once you cover your short position, you will realize your gains and
losses by returning the borrowed stock that you just bought to your
broker. In order to do this, you execute a "cover" order to buy back
shorted shares from the market.[Â¹]{.mark} Any money you make from the
short-to-cover change is yours to keep. In essence, you make money when
the stock goes down.

Shorting allows you to make money when you are skeptical about a stock,
and you should use it as a tool in your trading to take advantage of
opportunities as they present themselves.

##  Decoding 17 Key Metrics for Top Stocks

Key statistics are vital when you look at long-term profitability and
potential company performance. These statistics simplify important
long-term factors in a few simple numbers. You can use key statistics to
help you decide whether you might still like a stock in a decade or so.
When you look up a stock on Yahoo Finance, you will see these statistics
formatted like the photo below. On other sites, the format of these
statistics may look different, but the important statistics still mean
the same thing.

Here are the key statistics for International Business Machines
Corporation, \$IBM:

![](media/image10.png){width="3.5in" height="2.25in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

The first thing you will see is the previous close price. The last
transaction for the market day prior occurred at this price. This is
what daily price and percent change for the day is based on.[Â²]{.mark}

Next, you will see the stock's open price for the day. The difference
between this price and the previous close is your premarket change. Big
differences between previous close prices and open prices draw a lot of
attention to a stock.[Â³]{.mark} As we talked about earlier, this
attention is great for nine-to-noon trading because it significantly
increases early-morning volatility. Besides acting as an early indicator
for huge potential momentums, a large difference between the previous
close and open price can indicate very high days where the price may go
up exponentially before dropping in a sell off.[Â³]{.mark} For long-term
investors and medium-term trades, this can provide a great time for you
to sell part of a position and lock in some gains to reinvest into
another stock. For active traders trading the right stocks, this
presents you with opportunities for massive gains (we will talk more
about trading premarket gainers in Secret #36).

For stocks that open significantly lower than they previously close (say
over five percent), the attention they get is a little different from
gainers. Whereas gainers attract brand new buyers, losers attract
sellers. However, these are different sellers; these are usually
existing shareholders liquidating a position out of fear, uncertainty,
doubt, changed company mentality, etc. For this reason, losing stocks
typically do not attract as much volume or volatility as gaining
stocks.[â´]{.mark} This makes actively trading losing stocks a fairly
difficult venture because prices usually stay relatively flat when
volatility decreases, charts simply trending sideways. However, losing
stocks present terrific buying opportunities for you to enter long-term
and medium-term positions, buying up "cheap" shares midday.[â´]{.mark}

Our next key statistics are the bid and the ask. These two statistics
represent a very important part of active trading: level 2. Level 2
shows all the limit-buy and limit-sell orders that are not filled at
market price. We will talk more about different order types in Secret
#19, but the important thing to know is that these orders are set for a
specific price.[âµ]{.mark} In the level 2, you see all the "bidders"
willing to pay a price for a stock and all the "askers" willing to sell
a stock at a price. The level 2 makes a list of all open orders and
sorts bids in ascending order and asks in descending order.[â¶]{.mark}
This means that the highest bid and lowest ask show up on the top of the
level 2.[âµ]{.mark} These two numbers, the highest-paying unfilled buy
order and the lowest-priced unfilled sell order, are what Yahoo Finance
puts in front of the "x" in their bid and ask numbers.[Â¹]{.mark}
[â¶]{.mark}

When you submit an order at a specific price that does not immediately
get filled, you can instantly see your order and number of shares added
into in the level 2.[â¶]{.mark} You can also see unfilled orders in the
order book. The order book records all unfilled orders and can put on a
graph to show the depth of a market.[â·]{.mark} You can constantly see a
stock's level 2 change as new bidders and askers put in orders, bidders
and askers get filled, and general price movement in any direction
occurs.[â·]{.mark} The same is true for the order book's market depth
chart. Here is a rough example of an order book's market depth chart.
The more shares in this chart at different price levels, the more liquid
a market is.[â¸]{.mark} Liquidity (how easily you can enter and exit a
trade) is extremely important if you trade actively because the last
thing you want is to be forced to sell at lower prices due to low market
liquidity.

![](media/image11.png){width="4.75in" height="2.53in"}

There are fewer orders between buyers and sellers where their prices
meet because this is close to the last transaction price, the price that
is displayed for a stock. When you approach this price as a buyer or
seller, there is a good chance that your order will be filled in a
liquid market and your order will disappear from the order book,
entering the transaction history.[â¹]{.mark}

Yahoo Finance does not show you the full level 2 or order book for
stocks, but rather they display an often-delayed National Best Bid and
Offer.[Â¹â° Â¹Â¹]{.mark} You can find these essential tools through your
broker's trading platform (which should also have significantly improved
data feeds).

Whenever you submit an order, you have to decide how many shares to buy.
Next to the "x" in Yahoo Finance's bid and ask boxes, you can see the
number of shares currently available at the top bid and bottom ask price
level.[Â¹]{.mark} The number of shares next to the bid and ask represents
the total number of shares that all buyer or sellers are willing to buy
or sell at the bid or ask. For \$IBM, this means that 800 shares from an
unknown number of people are up for sale at \$144.53 a share.[Â¹]{.mark}
This is only shown on the highest bid and lowest ask on Yahoo Finance,
but your broker should show share amount information for all price
levels on the level 2 which you can use to find specific buyers or
sellers of a stock you are trading.[Â¹Â²]{.mark}

For active traders, you can look at the volume of sellers or buyers at
certain levels in the level 2 to find price levels that a stock may have
a difficult time passing because of a high number of buyers or sellers
at that price level. These levels are often called "buy" and "sell
walls" in the market depth chart.[Â¹Â³]{.mark}

The difference between the highest bid and the lowest ask is the spread.
Generally, spreads decrease as volume increases.[Â¹â´]{.mark} Be very
careful trading extremely cheap stocks with very large spreads because
you may enter a position and find that your only way out is to sell your
shares at a much lower price than you acquired them for because the bid
is significantly lower than the ask.[Â¹âµ]{.mark} Also, watch out for
suspicious characters who promote cheap stocks with large spreads
because they may buy shares on the significantly lower bid and sell them
to you on the much higher ask.[Â¹â¶]{.mark} Especially in low-liquidity
scenarios, you should avoid wide spreads to mitigate risk.

Spreads matter less for long-term investors and medium-term traders. For
\$IBM, the current spread is 52 cents, a fairly large spread for such a
large stock.[Â¹]{.mark} IBM's spread here is most likely very large
because our snippet was taken during premarket hours with lower
liquidity. For most large and active stocks, expect to see a spread of
one to two cents. Keep in mind that some more expensive stocks may have
larger spreads because the relative importance of twenty cents for an
\$800 stock is much lower than for a twenty-five-cent stock.[Â¹â·]{.mark}

For all types of trading, you should aim to buy the bid and sell the
ask. We will talk more about specific types of orders in Secret #19, but
just remember that you can set your price for where you buy and sell.
All traders can save themselves a little extra money by buying the lower
bid and selling the higher ask.[Â¹â¸]{.mark} Playing the spreads to your
advantage is especially important for active traders. By getting the
best possible entries and exits, you will be able to maximize your
trading profits.

Here is a refresher image of \$IBM's key statistics:

![](media/image10.png){width="3.5in" height="2.25in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

After the bid and ask, we see the day's range and the fifty-two week
(yearly) range. These two ranges are also easily determined by looking
at a stock's chart.[Â¹]{.mark} Sometimes there is a slider here that
visually shows where the current price is on this range. Looking at the
day's range midway through the day can be a great way to predict whether
a stock has hit its bottom or top for the day yet.Â²â°

If you are looking at buying for swing trading or a long-term entry, you
can try to get in on a day when the price is at the bottom of the daily
range instead of new highs. For active trading, you will usually see new
highs and judge the daily range exclusively on charts.

When stocks get tons of attention, volume, and media coverage while
close to their fifty-two-week highs, ask yourself if you think the stock
has potential to set new highs and grow its fifty-two-week range
upward.[Â²â°]{.mark} Apply a similar mentality to stocks near the bottom
of their fifty-two-week range.

Price ranges reflect chartable price movements and not much more. Ask
yourself what could cause a stock to fall down after it hits a high
fifty-two-week maximum if it falls towards the middle or bottom of its
fifty-two-week range.

-   Did something bad happen this year?

-   Is the company having an internal problem?

-   Does the marketplace demand this company?

-   Can the company easily access all required goods?

-   Did the company recently downsize?

-   What do the annual reports' forward-thinking statements say?

-   Are there suddenly active competitors in this space?

The next key statistics are daily volume and three-month average volume.
In the case of \$IBM, the average daily number of shares bought and sold
for the past three months is 4,225,556.[Â¹]{.mark} High daily volumes
tell you that there is a lot of interest in a stock because there are
lots of people trading it. Volume is always good in the market because
it tightens spreads and is the primary factor behind
liquidity.[â¶]{.mark} Your trades will fill quickly in high-volume
markets at your desired price.[â·]{.mark}

You do not have to worry about volume too much for your long-term
investments. If you hold a position for a decade, you will be happy to
eventually sell it even if you have to wait an extra sixty seconds or so
to be filled. However, you should always keep volume in mind when you
actively trade. First of all, you can expect more volatility in stocks
that have significantly higher daily volume than their three-month
average since an abnormal catalyst drew investors to a stock on any
particular day.[Â¹â¹]{.mark} This increased volume indicates that many
more traders are buying and selling a stock than usual, increasing
liquidity, volatility, etc. When trading nine-to-noon, be especially
skeptical about stocks with under 500,000 daily shares
exchanged.[Â²Â¹]{.mark} Even extremely early in the trading day, most
gaining stocks that are worth your time will easily pass this volume
value. Keep in mind that small stocks you actively trade may have very
small average volumes. This is fine as long as the news, premarket gain,
or another catalyst that drives people to pay attention to a stock
increases the daily volume to highly-liquid levels.

When you trade stocks that have under around 500,000 to 1,000,000 shares
exchanged each day, you run the risk of failing to get your sell orders
filled at market prices, leaving you stuck in a trade that should have
been quick.[Â¹â¹]{.mark} [Â²Â¹]{.mark} You can spot low volume stocks to be
careful with when actively trading when you see flat one-minute
candlesticks. Flat candles open and close at the same price because the
market either exchanged no shares or only traded shares at the same open
price. When you see a completely flat candle, question the liquidity and
underlying volume of the stock you are investigating.[Â²Â²]{.mark} Do not
forget to look at the volume bars on the bottom of your charts. Low
liquidity (volume) frightens other traders away from a stock, thereby
lowering its tradable volatility.

You can use volume to gain an edge over other traders by watching out
for abnormally large red volume bars. Usually, you can expect a stock to
approach its minimums when there are significantly large red volume bars
at the same time as a downward movement.[Â²Â³]{.mark} These bars are red
because there is a negative price change, but the relative magnitude of
them is significantly important because it indicates that tons of people
were trading to get out of their positions in a stock, artificially
lowering the price to its minimum or close to it. Let's look at a real
example of this trading principle with \$IBM around the time of the 2008
market crash.

![](media/image12.png){width="4.75in" height="2.0249989063867018in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

We can see two large downtrends here in mid-2005 and mid-2008. Notice
that there are significantly taller red volume bars around the time that
the biggest downward movement happened at both of these drops. Buying
when you see tall red volume bars proved extremely effective in both of
these scenarios, especially in the long-term.

Keep in mind that this principle holds true in active trading on a
short-term basis as well. Here is a swing-trading example with Titomic
Limited:

![](media/image13.png){width="4.75in" height="2.06in"}

[Â²â´]{.mark}

\$TTT.AX bottomed after an ABCD movement almost exactly where the large
red volume candle occurred, forecasting a reversal (we will explore ABCD
setups in Secret #28).

The next key statistic is market capitalization. \$IBM's market cap is
\$132,141,000,000 as of today.[Â¹]{.mark} You get this number by
multiplying the \$IBM price-per-share by the number of outstanding
shares for International Business Machines Corporation.Â²âµ Market caps
are essentially what a company is worth in the stock market unless it
has a class of valued shares that are not traded publicly.[Â²â¶]{.mark}
Many companies issue shares like these under different classifications
such as "Class B shares" in order to keep board-of-directors voting
rights in the company.[Â²â·]{.mark} For example, a company's Class A stock
could carry one vote per share, whereas the private Class B stock
carries ten votes per share.[Â²â·]{.mark} This would allow a company to
control internal affairs without worrying about public shareholder
voting response. In general though, market capitalization is a fair way
to estimate the value of a company.

Once you know the value of a company, you can classify them into
small-cap, mid-cap, and large-cap companies. Generally, a larger market
cap brings more attention, volume, and newfound investors to a stock as
media attention compounds.Â²â¸ Companies that prove they are worth a lot
in the market with their large or medium capitalization are great
candidates for your long-term investments.

You will usually trade smaller market-cap companies actively since they
have increased volatility often due to lower floats. We will discuss
these terms and talk more about finding nine-to-noon trades in Secrets
#23 and #36.

A lot of trading is based on public perception of a company. Sometimes,
you may see irregular company valuation based on principles rather than
fundamental share value. Remember to use your knowledge of news to
experiment in publicly-commentated positions even if you disagree with
some companies and their stocks. The government taxes capital gains from
all companies equally despite their values and valuations. With quick
and well-informed positions, you can take advantage of short-term
investor trends. Just remember to set disciplined stop-losses and
understand the increased risk of trading media-influenced stocks (see
Secret #19 for stop-losses).

In case you forgot, here is a refresher of \$IBM's key statistics:

![](media/image10.png){width="3.5in" height="2.25in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

Our next key statistic is beta. You can use beta to quickly estimate a
stock's long-term volatility and performance. Yahoo Finance uses a
single regression beta.[Â²â¹]{.mark} Some find this beta calculation
unreliable because its value can be manipulated by changing time periods
or comparison indices (see Secret #16).[Â²â¹]{.mark} To calculate beta,
Yahoo Finance uses individual stock covariance compared to the S&P 500's
three-year return and the S&P 500's three-year variance.[Â³â°]{.mark} You
can calculate a stock's beta this way by using the formula:

$\beta = (covariance(stock\ 3\ year\ return,\ S\& P\ 3\ year\ return))\  \div \ (variance(S\& P))$[Â³Â¹]{.mark}

This beta value represents the historical correlation between the stock
and the S&P. Stocks with beta values greater than one have historically
been more volatile than the S&P, whereas stocks with beta values less
than one have been less volatile.[Â³Â²]{.mark}

For example, a stock with a beta value of two has historically gone up
eight percent for the S&P\'s every four percent increase, a stock a with
a beta value of .5 has historically gone down five percent when the S&P
drops by ten percent, and so on. Higher beta values indicate
historically higher volatility and aggressiveness compared to the S&P's
movement, and lower beta values indicate a more conservative,
slower-moving stock.[Â³Â²]{.mark}

Negative beta values indicate that a stock moves in the opposite
direction of the S&P. Lower negative values indicate greater inverse
volatility as with normal betas (lower being larger
negatives).[Â³Â²]{.mark}

Stocks with low, positive betas under one can be strong candidates for
long-term investments because they are historically less risky. Medium
betas, say between one and two, also stand out as strong potential
long-term picks for higher rewards. Ensure that your long-term portfolio
balances between risky and safer stocks to take advantage of up markets
and to protect yourself in down markets (we will talk more about
diversification in Secret #35). Higher-beta stocks should be analyzed
for market factors that may increase volatility.[Â³Â³ Nine-to-noon stocks
often have]{.mark} higher beta values and are very risky unless
carefully and actively managed through technical analysis (coming in
Part Two).

Beta alone should not determine whether or not you like a stock. None of
these key statistics should. However, when used together along with
technical analysis and deep corporate background research, you can use
these tools to create strong, outperforming long-term portfolios. For
medium-term and active trading, beta can be used to predict how much a
stock will move in one day if the market only moves a certain
percentage. For example, you might see daily resistances on a stock with
a beta of four once its daily percent change reaches four times that of
the S&P.[Â³Â³]{.mark} This principle applies mostly to swing trading and
can be used to find opportune times to exit a position held for more
than one day.

Our next key statistics are EPS (TTM), earnings per share for the
trailing twelve months, and P/E Ratio (TTM), profit to earnings ratio
for the trailing twelve months. Earnings per share is calculated by
dividing a company's total earnings for the last twelve months by the
number of outstanding shares.[Â³â¶]{.mark} This shows how much profit the
company has made per share of stock for the past twelve months. This
number is just as important as earnings, the money a company brings in
from revenue after expenses.

When a stock's EPS is negative, you know that the trailing twelve months
have had overall negative earnings; the company lost money.[Â³â¶]{.mark} I
am sure you know that many companies lose money in some markets and make
tons of money in others, but you should be careful when you see a
company with a negative EPS. At least for long-term investing, it is
usually a good idea to invest in companies that make money. For active
trading, most of the companies you will see have negative EPS numbers.
This is fine because you do not care if the company you trade goes
bankrupt the day after you buy and sell its stock.

You can divide a stock's share price by its EPS to get the
Price-to-Earnings ratio.[Â³â´]{.mark} The P/E ratio is a terrific tool for
analyzing a company's current valuation. Average P/E ratios are around
twenty.[Â³âµ]{.mark} Companies with P/Es over twenty are valued more by
the marketplace than their earnings alone, and companies with P/Es under
twenty are often called undervalued. When stocks have P/Es that
significantly exceed twenty, ask yourself why the market values a stock
so much. Similarly, ponder as to why a company may have an extremely low
P/E when you see one. Lower P/Es are generally good, and EPS depends a
lot on the number of outstanding shares.

A P/E ratio of twenty means that you pay \$20 for every dollar a company
makes to own their stock (since
$EPS \bullet P/E\ Ratio = share\ price$).[Â³â·]{.mark} If you buy a
company that has a P/E of 8, it would take you eight years to make your
initial cash back if absolutely nothing changed about the net income of
the company. Note that companies with negative earnings have no P/E
ratios.[Â³â·]{.mark}

Earnings per share is reported on companies' quarterly and annual
reports. Yahoo Finance calculates EPS and P/E Ratios by using GAAP
earnings, a number that comes from the company's reported books that
uses generally accepted accounting principles.[Â³â¸]{.mark} GAAP earnings
are useful for comparing one company\'s earnings directly to another
company.[Â³â¸]{.mark} You may see non-GAAP EPS reported in a company\'s
report as well. These calculations generally account for specific
expenses, amortization, incomes, taxes, and many other business-specific
numbers that they are unable to include in GAAP earnings.[Â³â¸]{.mark} The
market and its analysts will generally only look at GAAP earnings, but
you should also look at non-GAAP earnings when investing long-term
because these numbers are more representative of a business's true
operations in income. Non-GAAP earnings can provide you with a more
accurate and clear insight into a company's profitability, but you
should stick to GAAP earnings when looking at P/Es and comparing
companies.[Â³â¸]{.mark}

To see more about a company's financials without directly reading these
reports, click the "Financials" tab under a stock quote in Yahoo Finance
to see a company\'s income statement, balance sheet, and cash
flow.[Â³â¹]{.mark} An income statement shows a company's revenues and
expenses.[Â³â¹]{.mark} You can use this statement to determine a company's
net income. Balance sheets summarize the assets, liabilities, and equity
in a company.[Â³â¹]{.mark} You can subtract a company's' total liabilities
from a company's total assets to calculate the "book value" of the
company, the value if they sold all their assets and paid all their
liabilities.[â´â°]{.mark}

If the market cap is higher than the book value, then the market is
willing to pay more than the basic value of a company because they think
its assets provide more value. If the market cap is lower than a
company\'s book value, then the market is not willing to pay for the
full basic value of a company because they do not see value in the
company. Investing in companies valued below their book value allows you
to buy part of a company at a discount to their book value. You can have
terrific value entries using this method, but always ask yourself why
the market does not want to pay full price for a company\'s stock.
Additionally, ask yourself why the market is willing to pay extra for a
stock when its market cap significantly exceeds its book price. When
book price and market cap are very similar, ask yourself why the market
does not pay more for a company. Always stay skeptical. Try to find
companies with a fair price compared to their book value and industry
context. You want these companies to consistently increase their assets,
book prices, and stock prices in the long-term by growing their
underlying businesses. For reference, here is a strong book value growth
chart to watch for and imitate through your long-term portfolios:

![](media/image14.png){width="4.75in" height="2.49in"}

[â´Â¹]{.mark}

The last financial statement Yahoo Finance summarizes for you under the
"Financials" tab is a company's cash flow.[Â³â¹]{.mark} In addition to the
income statement that shows how much money a company is taking in, the
cash flow statement clarifies where money moves in a company. You can
analyze where cash comes in and out of corporation to understand how
efficiently their professional operations and management function, among
other things.[â´Â²]{.mark}

To get a quick insight into a company's revenue and earnings, look to
the bottom-right of your stock quote on Yahoo Finance to find these two
useful charts.

![](media/image15.png){width="2.25in"
height="2.31in"}![](media/image16.png){width="2.5in" height="2.25in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

Stocks generally go up with satisfactory quarterly earnings beats and
down after poor results. This is simply the stock's price adjusting to
the actual underlying company value or public perception of that value.
Lowered revenue, customer loss, or poor management can adversely affect
share price even when a stock beats analysts' estimated EPS. Either way,
expect to see large price movements when earnings season rolls around.
Guessing whether a company will beat earnings projections can be very
difficult. If you have a solid grasp of the company's market, then you
may be able to accurately predict an earnings outcome. However, most
earnings predictions are a fifty-fifty guesses, which make large gambles
on quarterly reports risky.[â´Â³ I will say that one more time to make
sure you remember it: earnings reports are unpredictable.]{.mark} Unless
you have exceptional knowledge about a company's market sector, learn to
measure this volatility and even profit from its short-term market
reactions (see Secret #21).

In case you forgot, here is a refresher of \$IBM's key statistics:

![](media/image10.png){width="3.5in" height="2.25in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

Earnings date simply states the next date that the company reports
quarterly earnings. Earnings reports almost always come out right after
market close.[â´â´]{.mark}

Next, you will see forward dividend and yield. Dividends are terrific
for your long-term portfolio because your stocks will pay you for
holding them! On top of your gains through appreciation, companies that
pay dividends make you money by paying you in cash that you can then
reinvest and compound back into more stock. \$IBM will pay an estimated
\$6.28 (4.28 percent based on current per share price) total dividend in
the coming year. This means that you will be paid \$6.28 in your
brokerage account for every share of \$IBM stock per annum. \$IBM
distributes its dividends in quarterly payments. Some companies may
elect to make larger annual or semiannual dividend payments, while
others elect to pay monthly dividends. As long as you own a stock before
the ex-dividend date that we see above and continue to hold it until
payment day, the underlying company will pay you in the stock's next
dividend distribution.[â´âµ]{.mark}

Dividends, like everything else in the market, are not guaranteed. A
company can choose to stop paying dividends at any time.[â´â¶]{.mark}
However, you can minimize your risk and establish dividend income
streams by investing in large companies that have a strong track record
of paying dividends. Great companies will increase their dividend
payments to investors over time as they continue to make more money and
their stock price increases. Sometimes, companies might maintain
consistent percent dividends on their stocks by increasing the cash
value of their dividends because of recent gains in the stock
price.[â´â·]{.mark} This sort of behavior shows that a company cares about
its shareholders and is a good investment. You can learn more about how
a company treats its shareholders by looking at their dividend payout
ratio. Yahoo Finance displays stocks' dividend payout ratios under the
"Statistics" tab in the bottom right.[â´â¸]{.mark} Alternatively, you can
calculate a stock's dividend payout ratio yourself by using the formula:

$Dividend\ Annual\ Dollar\ Payout\ /\ Earnings\ Per\ Share\ (GAAP) = Dividend\ Payout\ Ratio$[â´â¹]{.mark}

Newer or smaller companies usually have lower dividend payout ratios so
that they will have more money to reinvest into the company. Inversely,
large and established companies usually have higher dividend payout
ratios.[â´â¹]{.mark} \$IBM's dividend payout ratio is currently 97.28
percent, which means that they pay shareholders 97.28 percent of their
net GAAP profits.[Â¹]{.mark}

Remember that shareholders own stock which is part of the company, and
executives who deserve compensation for their hard work at a company
usually receive tax-preferred payments in the form of dividend income
through qualified dividends. Even if you immediately reinvest your
dividend income, you will be taxed on it as if it was ordinary income,
paying ordinary federal income and state tax rates.[âµâ°]{.mark} Qualified
dividends, however, are taxed at long-term capital gains rates which are
based on income brackets and much lower than ordinary income
taxes.[âµÂ¹]{.mark} For you to qualify for qualified dividends according
to the IRS, you must

-   Be paid by an American company that qualifies for qualified
    dividends (some foreign exceptions) and

-   Hold stock for over sixty days (ninety for preferred stock) out of
    the 121-day period (181 for preferred stock) beginning sixty days
    before the ex-dividend date (ninety for preferred stock)[âµÂ²
    âµÂ³]{.mark}

Preferred stock is stock that guarantees you a fixed dividend paid
before common stock. This kind of stock often carries no company voting
rights.[âµâ¶]{.mark}

Whether or not a dividend is qualified determines the taxes you will pay
on it. In 2018, refer to the following tax chart which looks at your
Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) to determine your qualified dividend tax
rate:

  -------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ---------------------
  Qualified      Single                Married Filing        Head of Household     Married Filing
  Dividend Tax                         Jointly or Qualifying                       Separately
  Rate                                 Widow(er)                                   

  0%             \$0--\$39,475         \$0--\$78,950         \$0--\$52,850         \$0--\$39,475

  15%            \$39,476--\$510,300   \$78,951--\$612,350   \$52,851--\$306,175   \$39,476--\$306,175

  20%            \$510,301 or more     \$612,351 or more     \$306,176 or more     \$306,176 or more
  -------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ---------------------

[âµÂ³ âµâ´ âµâµ âµâ¶]{.mark}

Similar to long-term capital gains tax rates, you can actually avoid all
taxes if your income bracket is low enough, showing that the government
wants you to save and invest to grow your wealth through assets.
However, nonqualified dividends are included in your AGI and taxed at
your marginal income tax rate. On top of this tax, high-income investors
must pay a 3.8 percent net investment income tax for any interest,
income, capital gains, and other investment income that exceeds the
following MAGI thresholds (we looked MAGI in Secret #7) (2017):

  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Tax Filing Status                   MAGI Threshold

  Single                              \$200,000

  Married filing jointly or           \$250,000
  qualifying widow(er)                

  Head of household                   \$200,000

  Married filing separately           \$125,000
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------

[âµÂ³ âµâ· âµâ¸]{.mark}

You generally do not need to remember these tables or worry about how
your dividends are classified. Form 1099-DIV and 1099-INT from your
broker will clearly lay out your income information for you to simply
insert into tax returns and provided calculations.

You can check the dividend payment history, dividend payment amount
increases, and dividend payment schedule for any common stock by opening
its expanded chart in Yahoo Finance and hovering over the "D" icons at
the bottom of the chart above the volume bars.[â´â·]{.mark} Keep in mind
that these will not show up for stocks that do not pay dividends. Stocks
that do not pay dividends will show an N/A for dividend yield and have
no ex-dividend date.[âµâ¹]{.mark} If a stock paid timely, increasing
dividends every quarter for the past decade, then it will likely
continue to pay timely, increasing dividends every quarter.

Stocks that pay suspiciously high dividends should be investigated for
signs of financial hardship; very high dividends can be used to draw in
unsuspecting investors.[â¶â°]{.mark}

High-yielding dividend portfolios are great for down markets because
underlying companies pay you even if your stocks lose value. Moreover,
you can take dividend payments out of your portfolio without selling any
positions. Keep preferred shares in the back of your head. Preferred
shares have dividends paid out before common shares, often trading
slight historical returns for higher dividend payments.

Our last key statistic is the one-year target estimate. This number is
the average predicted price from all public analysts on Yahoo Finance
for the next 365 days.^61\ 62\ 63^ You can assume that this number is
based on speculation and poor predictions, but you should still pay some
attention to it. Although nobody really knows where a stock can
potentially be in a year, it is always good to see public analysts
predicting that a stock's price will increase if you like said stock.
With that said, do not worry too much about this statistic unless it is
radically lower than or higher than the current price. If you see a
target estimate that astounds you, ask yourself why analysts predict
that price. Keep in mind that larger stocks have significantly more
analysts than smaller stocks, so the average price estimate on large
stocks combines many more prices than estimates for smaller stocks.

All of these key statistics act as terrific indicators of a company's
overall health and future potential. However, these statistics should
not be singled out and used alone to determine whether you want to
invest in a stock. Use these statistics considerately for long-term
positions and implement them into your larger stock analysis skill set.

##  The Zen of Long-Term, Low-Touch Investing

Now that we understand the basics of individual stocks, let's look at
index funds. Index funds are large collections of stocks and that you
can use to track the health of the overall market. The three largest US
index funds are the S&P 500^Â®^, Dow Jones Industrial Average^Â®^, and
NASDAQ^Â®^ Composite. These funds have been used for decades to look at
the overall performance of the stock market.[Â¹]{.mark}

When you look at index funds, see if they are weighted or unweighted.
All of the aforementioned indices are weighted, which means that some
stocks carry a larger percentage of the index's overall balance than
others.[Â²]{.mark} In an unweighted index fund, all stocks represent the
same percentage of the overall index.[Â³]{.mark} Differently-weighted
stocks allow index funds to more accurately represent the market by
giving more value to higher market-cap stocks. Market-cap weighting is
the most popular type of fund weighting because it emphasizes the value
of larger, more valuable, and generally more established
companies.[Â³]{.mark}

Sometimes, the unweighted variant of weighted funds may outperform the
weighted fund in the long run. For example, the S&P 500 turned \$10,000
from May 1, 2003 to the time of writing (2018) into
\$31,857.16.[â´]{.mark} However, an equally-weighted S&P 500 ETF fund
turned that same investment into \$42,685.74.[âµ]{.mark} Keep in mind,
these metrics completely ignore dividends during the same time period
which averaged a two percent re-investable annual gain.[â´]{.mark}

While equally-weighted funds may expose your portfolio to more upside,
remember that you inherently incur greater risk by giving your smallest,
most volatile stocks the same weight as your large, stable ones.\
The S&P 500 Index (\^GSPC) is where we get our nine percent number from
before we even account for reinvested dividends. The S&P contains 500 or
so stocks that may be slightly altered annually by S&P Global Inc. and
its subsidiaries.[â¶]{.mark} Historically and currently, the S&P covers
about eighty percent of the stock market by market
capitalization.[â¶]{.mark} The S&P contains some of the largest companies
in the market that represent their market sectors, creating a
particularly diverse fund.[Â³]{.mark} To cover so much of the market, the
index exclusively includes companies with very large market
caps.[â¶]{.mark} This also allows the index to track liquidity and risk
in the market's largest companies.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average (\^DJI) or Dow 30 is currently a basket
of thirty large, sturdy stocks that cover all industries except
transportation and utilities.[â·]{.mark} Ownership of the \^DJI has moved
around a lot historically, and the index is currently supervised by a
joint effort between S&P Global, the CME Group, and News Corp under the
name S&P Dow Jones Indices.[â¸]{.mark} This index was started early in
the twentieth century by Charles Dow, and it originally had only twelve
stocks, a number that grew to twenty in 1916 and thirty in
1928.[â¸]{.mark} Since then, the stocks in the Dow have changed through
recessions, bankruptcies, acquisitions, and component drops thanks to
its management firms. The Dow is a price-weighted index, meaning more
expensive per-share stocks account for larger percentages of the total
index.[â·]{.mark} The Dow adjusts for splits and reverse splits to
account for voluntary changes in companies' share prices (we will look
more at splits in Secret #23).[â¹]{.mark}

The NASDAQ Composite (\^IXIC) is a unique index because its price is
based on the entire NASDAQ Stock Market.[Â¹â°]{.mark} The NASDAQ is a
market-cap weighted collection of every common stock in the NASDAQ
exchange, currently the second-largest exchange in the world behind the
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE).[Â¹Â¹]{.mark} The NASDAQ came around in the
seventies to bring electronic listing services to companies, and most
large technology firms and innovative companies are listed on the
NASDAQ.[Â¹Â²]{.mark} The NASDAQ Composite contains thousands of common
stocks, limited partnerships, real estate investment trusts, and foreign
stock holdings.[Â¹â°]{.mark} This number increases every time a new
company goes public and gets listed on the exchange.[Â¹Â²]{.mark} The
NASDAQ 100 (\^NDX) is another index that comes from the NASDAQ. This
market-cap weighted index contains 100 or so components from the largest
non-financial companies on the NASDAQ.[Â¹Â³]{.mark} Both the NASDAQ and
NASDAQ 100 are known for the large technology companies that make up a
significant chunk of each index. However, the NASDAQ 100 has
historically outperformed the NASDAQ Composite significantly, as shown
below:

![](media/image17.png){width="4.75in" height="2.04in"}

[Â¹â´]{.mark}

From highest to lowest final return, we see the NASDAQ 100 and the
NASDAQ Composite.

The NYSE also has an NYSE Composite (\^NYA), but this index has
underperformed the S&P 500 in the past, as shown below. As with the
NASDAQ Composite, the NYSE Composite is a collection of the thousands of
NYSE listed securities less its closed-end funds, ETFs, limited
partnerships, and derivatives (we will look at these later).[Â¹âµ]{.mark}

![](media/image18.png){width="4.75in" height="2.04in"}

[Â¹â¶]{.mark}

From highest to lowest final return, we see the S&P 500 and the NYSE
Composite.

Lastly, we get to the Russell 3000[^Â®^]{.mark} (\^RUA), Russell
2000[^Â®^]{.mark} (\^RUT), and Russell 1000[^Â®^]{.mark} (\^RUI)
Indices.[Â¹â·]{.mark} These three FTSE-Russell-managed funds come from the
foreign London Stock Exchange Group.[Â¹â¸]{.mark} The \^RUA is a
market-cap-weighted collection of 3,000 very large American companies
that diversifying investors cherish since the index covers about
ninety-eight percent of the stock market.[Â¹â¹]{.mark}

The \^RUT is a market-cap weighted collection of the lowest 2,000
market-cap stocks in the Russell 3000. This fund is used to collectively
measure the performance of small and mid-cap stocks.[Â²â°]{.mark} The
Russell 2000 represents about eight to nine percent of the Russell
3000.[Â²Â¹]{.mark}

The \^RUI is our last market-cap weighted fund that makes up the
remaining highest 1,000 market-cap components in the Russell 3000. In
contrast to the Dow Jones Industrial Average which tracks thirty large
corporations, the \^RUI contains a wider, diverse variety of large
companies.[Â²Â²]{.mark} The large-cap companies in Russell 1000 represent
about ninety-one to ninety-two percent of the Russell 3000 or ninety
percent of the overall stock market by capitalization.[Â²Â²]{.mark}

[Despite their differences, all three Russell^Â®^ indices perform
relatively similarly as they track market conditions, as shown
below:]{.mark}

![](media/image19.png){width="4.75in" height="2.02in"}

[Â²Â³]{.mark}

From highest to lowest return at the mid-2018 peak just before the final
downtrend, we see the Russell 2000, Russell 1000, and Russell 3000
Indices.

[The only index to seriously deviate from the Russell 3000 above is the
Russell 2000.]{.mark}

Here is a chart that looks at the historical performance of the S&P 500,
Dow Jones Industrial Average, NASDAQ Composite, and Russell 3000 from
1985 to 2018.

![](media/image20.png){width="4.75in" height="2.03in"}

[â´]{.mark}

From highest to lowest final return, we see the NASDAQ Composite, Dow
Jones Industrial Average, Russell 3000, and S&P 500.

Notice that all of these indices recover from their downturns and pull
out to make you money in the long term. Even if you encounter a
short-term pullback, you can expect your money to recover and grow its
value in the end. Remember not to make overly emotional buying or
selling decisions in large economic uptrends or downtrends. It is always
darkest before the dawn.

With the S&P slumping as our lowest performer, we can see that there are
certainly ways to beat the "average" S&P market return while still
investing only in large, diversified, less-risky indices. I put average
in quotes because you should never limit your investing mentality. Never
tell yourself a limit to how much you can make. You can make as much
money as you want in the market as long as you put in enough time to
learn the technicals, practice trading, and research constantly.

Remember that you will constantly put money into the market as a
long-term investor saving for retirement, so you should care less about
short-term quick price swings. Your average fill price will average out
as you add more shares to your portfolio at different times. However,
you should still watch out for immediate market shifts that represent an
overall downturn in the economy. For example, we can see the 2001
dot-com bubble particularly well in the NASDAQ alongside the 2008
subprime mortgage housing market crisis and Madoff investment scandal in
all these major index funds.[Â²â´]{.mark}

Index funds track the holistic performance of our economy. In a way,
they are our economy. Indices are the most diversified and least
time-consuming way to invest in the stock market because they are just
large groups of hardworking companies. Index funds are foundational
baselines of many retirement plans because they are generally known as
the least-risky way to invest in the stock market.

Crashes in the overall market happen, and we will look at how to
forecast them in Secret #22. All investors should eventually expected
large institutions or shareholders to liquidate their holdings in any
given stock or overall market, driving prices downward. Remember that
stock prices are largely dictated by public perception, buying pressure,
and selling demands in the short term. Stick with your own solid
long-term picks that you know will continue making money when other
shareholders cash out their positions. It is almost impossible to time
overall market pullbacks because they only happen when widespread public
perception of the market changes. To keep your returns high, worry about
long-term stock performance and adapt to market trends when they arise,
carefully watching out for any glaring market issues. If your research
shows that a stock is poised to temporarily drop, never be afraid to act
on your knowledge and take gains. Additionally, you can adapt short
selling into your trading to profit from a market drop.

The S&P 500 in particular with its conservative seven percent
post-inflation average long-term capital gains is a true summary of
American business. This low-risk index also led to the creation of the
"four percent rule" among financial planners. The principle behind the
four percent rule is that you can withdraw four percent of your stock
portfolio in retirement and still have an average long-term return of
three percent in up and down-markets.[Â²âµ]{.mark} If you can cover your
annual expenses with four percent of your investments' combined value,
then many financial planners will tell you that you can retire. You can
use this principle to estimate how much you need to retire based on your
current consumption habits.

##  Wield the Power of ETFs and Mutual Funds

As you may have picked up already, diversification is key in long-term
portfolios (we will look more at diversification in Secret #35).
Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) and mutual funds are perfect for
diversification because they are large combinations of paper assets.

ETFs and mutual funds are almost exclusively created by large
organizations that want to help you retire. These two fund types are
going to be your best friends as a long-term, hands-off, research-light
investor. Now, let's start with ETFs.

As the name implies, buyers and sellers trade ETFs on exchanges during
the market day. This means that you can buy ETFs through your brokerage
that have tickers, bids, asks, and quotes just like stocks.[Â¹]{.mark}
Many brokerages have special agreements with ETF-creating firms that
allow you to purchase shares in an ETF without paying stock-trading
commissions.[Â²]{.mark}

All ETFs have management companies with investment goals.[Â³]{.mark} Some
ETFs carry only stocks balanced around large index funds. Others cover
market-specific sectors with a wide variety of companies.[Â¹]{.mark} From
the NASDAQ to wood, you can find an ETF for almost any market sector or
index managed actively or passively by an investment firm.[â´ âµ]{.mark}
Since ETFs are managed by their investing firms, you never have to worry
about rebalancing your portfolio when a new stock gets added to the S&P
500 Index or an amazing new company emerges in a niche industry.[â¶
Rather, your fund company will update their holdings as they see fit and
let you know after the fact.]{.mark}

Many investors successfully grow their retirements with index-fund ETFs
alongside sector-specific ETFs in fields that they know a lot about.
Alternatively, you may elect to purchase the best-performing ETFs you
can find. Whenever you invest into something for the long-term that you
know little about, be extra careful not to make overly-emotional
decisions in large market swings. Conversely, many investors feel fine
holding their personal, researched long-term picks through downturns
because they see the value in a company or sector's long-term business
or value propositions (perhaps based on technical analysis). It is
always fine to invest based on facts and figures alone, just remember to
stick by your principles as a trader. To step up your long-term
investing game, research the best performing assets you can find.

ETFs are great tools to use for diversified long-term investing because
they drastically reduce the amount of time you will spend researching
stocks alongside the commissions you will pay to buy them. For example,
you will spend much less time buying the Invesco QQQ Nasdaq-100 ETF
compared to researching all Nasdaq-100 stocks, purchasing 100 stocks,
and modifying your portfolio (quarterly in Invesco's case) when the
Nasdaq-100 changes slightly.[â·]{.mark} Additionally, you only have to
buy one ETF which may be available from your broker as a commission-free
trade rather than paying commissions on 100 unique stock purchases. This
simplifies and lowers the cost of investing straight from your every
paycheck.

When an ETF management company opens a fund with the SEC, they outline
their fund balancing plan for approval.[â¸]{.mark} Once an ETF receives
SEC approval, the management company acquires bulk assets (or cash,
rarely) from large institutional investors that are held in a custodial
bank. In this transaction, the large institution purchases ETF shares at
the weighting specified in the SEC proposal (or publically disclosed
holdings and weightings for actively-managed ETFs, released at the end
of every market day).[â¹]{.mark} Institutional investors exchange shares
in a like-kind exchange, giving up underlying securities and receiving
the same value in new "creation unit" ETF shares.[â¹]{.mark} This
exchange occurs at NAV (coming soon) only in extremely large blocks of
ETF shares.[Â¹â°]{.mark} These bulk transactions lower everyday
operational costs of ETFs by stopping small individual shareholders from
directly redeeming their shares for securities intraday. If an
institution (or anyone able to get enough shares to reach an ETF's block
size) collects thousands of ETF shares, then they can give them back to
the ETF firm in exchange for the fund's underlying assets (or cash,
rarely).[Â¹â°]{.mark} The fund gives the redeeming institution the lowest
cost basis shares from its holding to lower the firm's tax
liability.[Â¹Â¹]{.mark} Institutional and individual tax liabilities are
only dependent on ETF share price appreciation and dividend
distributions.[Â³]{.mark}

Four new terms you should learn when looking at ETFs of any kind are Net
Assets, Net Asset Value (NAV), Yield, and Net Expense Ratio.

An ETF's net assets are the cash fair market value (FMV) of all its
stocks, bonds payable, realized gains, and cash less its liabilities,
realized losses, and expense ratio fees (we will talk more about fees
soon).[Â¹Â²]{.mark} An ETF's net assets significantly increase when
institutions give ETF firms new assets in exchange for new ETF shares
and decrease when they redeem shares.[Â¹Â¹]{.mark} Net assets also
gradually fluctuate as markets move up and down, changing underlying
asset FMV.[Â¹Â²]{.mark} Funds with higher net assets are generally more
established and reputable. You should carefully investigate ETFs with
low net assets, especially funds with short performance histories.
Remember to look at a fund's overall long-term goals and see if it makes
sense to buy the ETF instead of directly purchasing its underlying
assets or creating your own portfolio.

For actively-managed ETFs, management firms must publicly publish
holdings and weightings of their ETFs at the end of every market
day.[â¸]{.mark} The net value from this report is used in place of an
automatically-calculated NAV used in infrequently rebalanced
ETFs.[â¸]{.mark}

To find the Net Asset Value of a fund, simply divide its net assets by
the number of shares outstanding.[Â¹Â³]{.mark} Generally, ETFs trade close
to their NAV because that value represents the weighting-adjusted price
of the underlying assets (represented per ETF share).[Â¹Â³]{.mark} Just
like how a stock is part of a larger company, your ETF share represents
a holding in a larger fund.

When an ETF trades above or below its NAV, you can sell or buy,
respectively, the fund with greater certainty that the price will move
towards the NAV. Many ETF firms and institutional traders maintain
extremely tight margins by using computers to automatically buy or sell
an ETF when it goes below or above a certain percentage value of the
fund's NAV.Â¹â´ With these useful computer-automated arbitrage ETF
mechanisms, institutions can purchase bulk shares at market, increasing
overall liquidity, and exchange them for a profit with the
ETF-management firm when prices are below NAV. Similarly, these firms
can buy bulk ETF shares at NAV to sell when the market pays much more
than an ETF's NAV, bringing the fund closer to its true value.Â¹â´

Slight deviations from an ETF's NAV provide enough profit incentive for
most large management firms and institutions to practice arbitrage
management techniques.Â¹â´ This constant supply-and-demand pull between
buyers, sellers, high-frequency traders, and institutions keeps ETF
prices backed by their underlying assets and near their true fair market
value. As an investor, this practice helps your portfolio stay
accurately-valued and extremely liquid when you want to buy or sell ETF
shares. With that said, many popular ETFs consistently trade slightly
above their NAV because they are traded just like stocks, so high demand
increases the price askers sell at.[Â¹âµ]{.mark}

Actively-trading index funds, market trackers, mutual funds, and ETFs
alike are all difficult to time since the overall market in any sector
is generally unpredictable. Additionally, these funds offer few
opportunities for high percent-change price swings compared to
individual stocks. For these reasons, you will essentially never trade
ETFs nine-to-noon. However, these same reasons make ETFs a strong tool
for long-term investing. Additionally, institutions with less emphasis
on percent gains, perhaps firms with much more money to leverage, make
money as a "market-maker" or fund arbitrageurs to keep your funds
performing as they should.

An ETF's yield is a form of investment income much like a stock's
dividends. When stocks or other assets in an ETF pay dividends or
interest income, the ETF pays out the cash to you based on the number of
ETF shares you own.[Â¹â¶]{.mark} Check your specific funds to see how
often they pay yield distributions. If most of the assets in a fund
payout quarterly dividends, then you can expect to receive quarterly
yields that will add up to the total yearly yield percentage as long as
you own an ETF.[Â¹â¶]{.mark} Though the ETF may own the underlying stocks
for years before you buy the fund, the same qualified dividend and
non-qualified dividend rules discussed earlier apply to your ETF as if
it was its own common stock (see Secret #15).[Â¹â¶]{.mark}

ETFs with higher yields are great for your portfolio. Remember that you
will pay taxes on dividend income but not on unrealized gains (this does
not matter in most tax-abated retirement plans). Look for good long-term
growth opportunities with ETF appreciation and yield payments. Yield
payments are great for reinvesting into new assets just like dividends.

Finally, we get to the cost of owning ETFs: net expense ratios (gross
expense ratios minus abatements). ETF firms charge investors annual net
expense ratios over the course of a year, spreading out the fee into
every day's net assets and NAV.[Â¹â·]{.mark} These expense ratios are
given as percentages and are subtracted from an ETF's annual gain or
loss.[Â¹â·]{.mark} For example, if an ETF charges an expense ratio of .25
percent and appreciates in a straight line by ten percent in a year,
then a \$100 investment will turn into \$109.75. However, you do not
directly pay this .25 percent expense ratio to the ETF fund. Rather, the
fund firm gradually lowers the ETF's net assets and per-share NAV every
day by .25 Ã· 365 = 0.0006849315 percent. An ETF or mutual fund can sell
assets in order to generate the cash necessary to pay expenses if there
is not enough dividend income or leftover cash to cover
expenses.[Â¹â¸]{.mark} You will always pay net expense ratios no matter
how a fund performs in a given year.[Â¹â·]{.mark}

Net expense ratios are generally lower for long-term passively-managed
funds compared to actively-managed ETFs.[Â¹â¹]{.mark} Look at a fund's
historic performance to see it investing in an actively-traded fund
could yield you higher long-term returns compared to index funds or
sector trackers. You should try to minimize ETF expense ratios whenever
possible unless a higher-cost fund yields higher returns because of its
superior management. If you want to avoid fees altogether and take
control over your investments, stick with your own diversified
portfolio.

Before ETFs came around, mutual funds were one of the easiest ways to
invest in America. Mutual-fund companies create a wide variety of funds
based around large market sectors and major indices.[â¸]{.mark} Money
market funds are a type of mutual fund that primarily invests in
guaranteed low-return investments (see Secret #3).[â¸]{.mark}

Mutual funds pool money from many investors, creating a greater overall
portfolio shared with you based on your cash stake in the fund. By
pooling your money with other investors, mutual funds give you the same
diversification benefits, time-saving management, and low trading fees
that ETFs offer.[Â²â°]{.mark} However, mutual funds operate much
differently than ETFs.

The two main types of mutual funds are open and closed-end
funds.[â¸]{.mark} In an open-end mutual fund, you send your money to pool
firms that issue you redeemable shares. These shares are purchased in
cash and valued at the fund's NAV at the close of the most recent
trading day.[Â²Â¹]{.mark} If you decide to sell your mutual fund shares,
the management company must buy them back from you at the last trading
day's closing NAV.[Â²Â¹]{.mark} Because you cannot trade an open-end fund
intraday, these funds are almost exclusively geared towards long-term
growth.[Â²â°]{.mark} In fact, many funds require you to submit purchase
orders before a trading day's closing price has been determined, forcing
you to estimate your entry point based on the overall market's daily
movement before you actually know the fund's daily closing
NAV.[Â²Â²]{.mark}

You buy open-end mutual funds with cash and receive cash when you sell
your fund stake just like ETFs.[Â²Â²]{.mark} Investors can buy and sell
mutual fund shares at any time, so the management company must always
keep cash on hand to buy back fund shares.[Â²Â³]{.mark} Additionally,
funds may have to sell positions to pay for share redemptions. When
individuals exit a fund, share selling can result in capital gains or
losses that become your tax liability.[Â²Â³]{.mark} In fact, almost any
fund management creates tax liabilities for you even if you never sell
your fund shares.[Â²â´]{.mark} Realized capital gains for the entire fund
are passed on to you to pay taxes on at least once a year.[Â²â´]{.mark}
For example, a fund could collectively purchase Wynn Resorts Ltd. stock
at \$60 in 2016. Then, you decide to purchase the fund in 2018 when
\$WYNN costs \$180. A few months later, your fund manager decides to
sell \$WYNN stock at \$195. The fund's net gain and tax liability is
based on the 2016 entry point at \$60, not your individual entry point
into the fund. The mutual fund is now responsible for paying long-term
capital gains tax, and managers must pass all tax liabilities onto fund
participants at least once a year.Â²â´ So, you will be responsible for the
fund's long-term capital gains on \$WYNN even though you missed out on
most of the growth (tax responsibility is split up depending on how many
fund shares you have).[Â²â´]{.mark} Remember that fund yields, dividend
income, or bond interest is generally taxed as income to you.[Â²â´]{.mark}
Watch out for open-end funds with large unrealized gains when you enter
them, as stock selling could cost you capital gains taxes before you
start making money.

Fund managers often lower annual shareholder tax liabilities by selling
losing positions to offset gains. Some individuals also use this
strategy to lower their tax burdens.[Â²âµ]{.mark} Say you have \$10,000 in
realized long-term capital gains on your \$WYNN trade. You can sell off
some losing long-term positions that will have a taxable loss of
\$10,000. Suddenly, you owe no long-term capital gains taxes because
your taxable net long-term gains are zero dollars.[Â²âµ]{.mark} You can
even carry over losses from one year to the next, by deducting up to
\$3,000 per year (\$1,500 is married filing separately) from individual
net income or dividend payments (2018).Â²â¶ You can exclusively sell off
long-term losses to offset long-term gains or liquidate short-term
losses to offset short-term gains.[Â²âµ]{.mark} Mutual fund managers can
settle unrealized losses in this same manner to lessen the entire fund's
overall tax liability.

While losing money to save money may sound counterproductive, remember
that you would have the same unrealized loss in your account anyways.
Although it is generally best to leave long-term picks alone when the
year ends, you can sell stocks for a loss to limit taxable gains and
then use that money to purchase other stocks in the same industry
sector. You can even buy the same stock after a month passes pursuant to
the IRS wash-sale rule.

The wash-sale rule does not allow long or short-term capital gain
liability deductions from losses when you sell for a loss and buy the
same stock or a "substantially identical" security back within thirty
days of the sale.Â²â· If you do choose to sell a position and purchase
other stocks in the same industry sector while avoiding the wash-sale
rule, just make sure you do not accidently cut off long-term gains. You
do not want to terminate a temporarily-down position for better
short-term tax treatment if you still believe in the underlying company.
Paying taxes when you do not have any losses to wash away gains is a
good thing.

Open-end mutual funds act more like pooled investment groups than ETFs.
You invest cash with others and share all tax liabilities and interests
with the mutual fund. You exit the fund by asking for your per-share NAV
back in cash after all the fund's assets settle after a trading
day.[Â²Â¹]{.mark} Mutual funds generally carry significantly higher net
expense ratios than ETFs because of the more involved management
required to keep passed-on tax liabilities down, selling investors paid
in cash, portfolios balanced appropriately, and other expenses paid
off.[Â²â¸]{.mark} You can expect even higher expense ratios with
smaller-valued or more-actively managed funds.[Â²â¸]{.mark}

Net expense ratios are deducted passively from mutual funds' net assets
to cover operational costs just like ETF expense ratios.Â¹â¸ In addition
to annual expense ratios, some funds charge front-end and back-end
"loads" (aka. fees).[Â²â¸]{.mark} These funds charge you percentages of
your investment whenever you buy into (front-end) or sell out of a fund
(back-end), hurting your overall returns.[Â²â¸]{.mark} If a fund
outperforms the market significantly, then these fees may be negligible
in the long-term. However, we already know about the power of compound
interest, and even small fees can have significant effects on your
portfolio down the line, as shown below.

Always search for high-performance funds with low net expense ratios and
loads. For mutual funds in particular, watch out for net expense ratios
that gradually rise depending on how long you own a fund.[Â²â¸ If a fund
charges high load fees or perhaps miscellaneous annual 12b-1 fees, make
sure you get a higher return for the managerial investment you
make.Â²â¸]{.mark}

  -------------------- -------------------- -------------------- --------------------
  [(8 percent annual   [0.29 percent        [1.22 percent        [0 percent expense
  return)]{.mark}      expense              expense              ratio (your
                       ratio]{.mark}        ratio]{.mark}        portfolio)]{.mark}

  [Initial             [\$20,000]{.mark}    [\$20,000]{.mark}    [\$20,000]{.mark}
  investment]{.mark}                                             

  [After 5             [\$28,994]{.mark}    [\$27,764]{.mark}    [\$29,387]{.mark}
  years]{.mark}                                                  

  [After 10            [\$42,033]{.mark}    [\$38,542]{.mark}    [\$43,179]{.mark}
  years]{.mark}                                                  

  [After 15            [\$60,936]{.mark}    [\$53,503]{.mark}    [\$63,443]{.mark}
  years]{.mark}                                                  

  [After 20            [\$88,339]{.mark}    [\$74,273]{.mark}    [\$93,219]{.mark}
  years]{.mark}                                                  

  [After 40            [\$390,185]{.mark}   [\$275,821]{.mark}   [\$434,490]{.mark}
  years]{.mark}                                                  
  -------------------- -------------------- -------------------- --------------------

[Â²â¹ Â³â°]{.mark}

Most mutual funds are open-end funds that issue shares to the public
after every trading day at NAV.[Â³Â¹]{.mark} With that said, some
"closed-end" investment funds only issue shares to the public
once.[Â²Â¹]{.mark} These shares are then traded between investors like ETF
shares and are not repurchased by fund issuers, which means that they
can be traded intraday.[Â²Â¹]{.mark} However, these funds generally have
little to no arbitrage mechanisms in place, so market prices can
drastically differ from NAV.[Â³Â²]{.mark}

Closed-end mutual funds mechanically function similarly to open-end
funds. Dividends and interest are paid out as ordinary-income
distributions to shareholders, net expense ratios are taken from net
assets, and net realized capital gains are passed on to shareholders at
least once a year.[Â³Â²]{.mark} Just make sure any fund you purchase has
ample liquidity and a strong price history near its net asset value.

Watch out for leveraged mutual funds and ETFs that increase shareholder
risk and potential returns by using debt to finance positions.Â³Â³ Some
leveraged mutual funds charge their expense ratios against total assets
including invested debt, raising their effective expense ratios or
hidden 12b-1 fees.[Â³â´]{.mark}

[One last investment vehicle you may see are unit investment trusts.
These funds make a one-time public offering for a fixed number of
securities which are forcefully sold on a specified termination date.â¸
The management company never alters the positions in the fund after this
sale, simply leaving the assets to grow unmanaged and generally with
very low expense ratios until the sale date when managers liquidate all
positions and redistribute profits and losses to shareholders who can
trade the fund until termination in the secondary market.Â³âµ These assets
are a notably rare but useful premade static long-term portfolio that
you can buy with only one convenient order.]{.mark}

By purchasing ETFs or mutual funds, you can significantly lower your
long-term risk and volatility by diversifying across a very broad range
of stocks and industries. Monthly contributions to these funds require
minimal management commitments or research on your part. Large
institutions operate diligently daily to ensure you have access to
top-rated funds on liquid exchanges, making it easier than ever to
purchase a slice of the American economy.

##  The 'Spice Trade' of Commodities and Currencies

Commodities and currencies are generally tougher markets to profit from
compared to stocks and corporate bonds. Some traders make consistent
profits by using technical analysis to actively manage commodity and
(non-crypto) currency portfolios, but these traders generally see less
volatility and realize lower percent gains than nine-to-noon traders
(see Part Two). Some active foreign exchange currency traders make up
for low volatilities by using leveraged debt to increase their position
stakes, but we already talked about why you should avoid trading on
margin earlier. With that said, you can make strong medium-term gains if
you think a certain commodity industry will significantly change in the
near-term. For example, a horrendous hurricane in Florida may increase
FCOJ-A futures prices (we will talk about what this means soon). Perhaps
you notice gas prices getting especially low and see potential upside in
crude oil. Alternatively, you can use currency markets to profit from
your overall knowledge of worldwide political issues and
country-specific news as currencies quickly change value compared to one
another.

In the long-term, expect worldwide news and trends to dictate commodity
and currency prices.[Â¹]{.mark} Because of this, it is tough to predict
overall future growth in commodities and currencies, and these positions
are generally excluded from long-term portfolios.[Â²]{.mark} There are
profits to be made in commodity and traditional currency markets, but
they are usually measly compared to the stock market.[Â³]{.mark} Rather,
these exchanges are used as necessary and proper tools for global
commerce. Let's start by looking at commodities.

Commodities are goods that are interchangeably similar to other
like-quality goods no matter who produces them. Commodity prices change
as the worldwide market determines value based on supply, demand, and
speculation.[â´]{.mark}

In frequently-traded exchanges, commodities have tickers followed by a
rating for a predetermined amount of the underlying commodity.[âµ]{.mark}
For example, FCOJ-A stands for A-rated Frozen Concentrated Orange Juice
solids and currently trades at \$1.60 a pound.[â¶]{.mark} Ratings
generally follow simple letter-ranking naming schemes to simplify your
investment research. Other common commodities include:

-   Corn

-   Oats

-   Rough Rice

-   Soybeans

-   Rapeseed

-   Wheat

-   Milk

-   Cocoa

-   Coffee

-   Cotton

-   Sugar

-   Adzuki Beans

-   Lean Hogs

-   Live Cattle

-   Feeder Cattle

-   Crude Oil

-   Ethanol

-   Natural Gas

-   Heating Oil

-   Gulf Coast Gasoline

-   RBOB Gasoline

-   Propane

-   Copper

-   Lead

-   Zinc

-   Tin

-   Aluminum

-   Nickel

-   Cobalt

-   Molybdenum

-   Recycled Steel

-   Gold

-   Platinum

-   Palladium

-   Silver

-   Palm Oil

-   Rubber

-   Wool

-   Amber

-   Coal

-   Lumber

-   Olive Oil

-   Palm Oil

-   Peanut Oil

-   Potatoes

-   Rye

-   Commodity Tea

-   Ambergris

-   Bristles

-   Butter

-   Cashmere

-   Feathers

-   Goats

-   Hide

-   Horses

-   Ivory

-   Lard

-   Musk

-   Civet Oil

-   Pork Bellies

-   Sheep

-   Silk

-   Sponges

-   Tallow

-   Whalebone

-   Compressed Hydrogen

-   Thorium

-   Uranium

-   Purified Terephthalic Acid (used in clothing and plastic bottles)

â´ â· â¸

Markets naturally trade some commodities like corn more frequently than
other goods, creating better active investment markets and more exchange
listings. More liquidity and volume keeps commodities on worldwide
exchanges and ensures tight spreads for you.[â´]{.mark}

Since commodity markets generally operate with less public volume than
equities, intraday price movements may seem abrupt at times.[â¹]{.mark}
However, even comparatively quick movements are usually relatively small
compared to nine-to-noon stocks (we will talk about these in Secret
#36). Unless there is a huge environmental report or war threat,
commodity prices generally have smaller and less-predictable movements
day-to-day.[Â¹â°]{.mark} For these reasons, many investors stick to
commodities for risk diversification in down markets (see uncorrelated
assets in Secret #35).[Â²]{.mark} For example, many flock to "safe"
precious metals when overall index funds start to drop significantly.
However, you can also speculate in the medium-term in commodities if you
have a background or education in a certain market. Since global supply
and demand drive price changes, you can identify macro-level trends that
could significantly change a commodity's immediate value. To gain a
better insight into commodity volatility and long-term performance
history, we will soon look at thirty-plus-year commodity price charts.
Generally, investors find that the stable, long-term returns divvied out
by index funds outperform almost all long-term commodity positions.

The market price you see when you look up any commodity is the price the
good most recently traded for in the live market. Every day, these "spot
prices" move when farmers sell their harvests to buying manufacturers,
distributors, etc.[Â¹Â¹]{.mark} You can find spot prices for most
frequently-traded commodities on Yahoo Finance under the "Markets"
tab.[Â¹Â²]{.mark} However, these quotes rarely show you long-term
performance. For this, search for specific commodities through online
quote searches or through direct commodity exchanges like the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange^Â®^, Chicago Board of Trade^Â®^, Carbon Trade
Exchange, European Energy Exchange^Â®^, New York Mercantile Exchange^Â®^,
Intercontinental Exchange^Â®^, London Metal Exchange^Â®^, Brasil Bolsa
BalcÃ£o SA, Multi Commodity Exchange of India, Zhengzhou Commodities
Exchange, Shanghai Futures Exchange, and Tokyo Commodity Exchange.[Â¹Â³
Â¹â´]{.mark} Your orders flow through these exchanges when you buy or sell
a commodity or futures contract (coming soon).[Â¹âµ]{.mark}

FCOJ-A's current spot price is around \$1.60 per pound with one contract
representing 15,000 pounds of A-rated Frozen Concentrated Orange Juice
solids.[â¶]{.mark} If orange juice was a stock, you could purchase it at
this price and hold it like any paper asset. The only problem is that
you get actual orange juice solids when you buy FCOJ-A rather than paper
or electronic stock certificates (we will look more at stock fulfillment
in Secret #37).

If you are a factory, you can purchase orange juice from the market
immediately at this price per pound. The exchange you submit your order
to will verify the quality and delivery of your commodity from the
seller you are nearly-immediately matched with.[âµ]{.mark} When a seller
posts an order on a commodity exchange, they or the exchange guarantee
the physical delivery of commodity orders.[Â¹â¶]{.mark} In some cases
where fulfillment is extremely costly, distributors may store orders in
warehouses or organize private delivery off an exchange.[Â¹â· Â¹â¸]{.mark}

If you buy one lot (15,000 pounds) of FCOJ-A, you will be responsible
for refrigerating and storing the solids on your own property once they
are delivered. As a speculative investor, actual physical delivery and
commodity storage is unideal for you (what can you do with a truckload
of juice?). Even for other commodities such as precious metals, actual
physical possession puts you at risk for theft and other extraneous
circumstances.

Futures contracts are the easiest way to trade commodities without
physically owning the underlying commodity. Instead of buying gold or
another commodity directly, you can buy a futures contract to lock in a
current price for one hundred troy ounces (standard single lot size) of
gold in a future time frame.[Â¹â¹]{.mark} If the price of gold rises
anytime in this predetermined timespan from your future contract price,
then you can sell your contract for a profit because your contract
purchases gold below its market price. As long as you sell your futures
contracts before their predetermined expiration dates, you will never
have to physically take delivery of the underlying commodity.[Â²â°]{.mark}
To short a commodity, simply sell a futures contract first, wait for
price movement, and buy it back later.[Â²Â¹]{.mark}

Let's say you grow Arabica coffee on your farm. You know that your
harvest will be ready in five months and should yield around 40,000
pounds of coffee beans. After looking up the historical price of coffee,
you grow fearful that prices will drop from the current spot price of
\$1 per pound to \$0.70 per pound (ICE Futures price, Coffee C^Â®^,
Arabica coffee).[Â²Â³]{.mark} To protect your crop value, you go to a few
different exchanges and find that you can get a 37,500-pound futures
contract from the New York Mercantile Exchange.[Â²Â²]{.mark} The value of
a 37,500-pound contract at the current spot price of \$1 per pound is
\$37,500. However, you do not want to spend \$37,500 on your contract,
so you go through a broker which gives you leverage and lets you trade
on margin. Because you have a great credit history with this broker,
they let you enter a "sell-to-open" or short coffee position at the
NYMEX after you deposit only \$4,000 in a margin account. You open this
position through your broker by selling a one-lot coffee contract for
37,500 pounds on the NYMEX that expires in five months. The buyer on the
other end of this contract is either a ready-to-buy supplier, a
speculator thinking the price will go up, a market maker, or the actual
exchange buying to create liquidity.[Â²â´]{.mark}

As the price of coffee changes, daily adjustments are made to the
\$37,500 leveraged value of your account at the closing price of every
market day.[Â²âµ]{.mark} Remember that your actual position is funded with
leveraged debt, and the cash deposit is only a small fraction of your
\$37,500 contract. As the price of coffee goes down, your short contract
appreciates because you have the ability to sell coffee at a higher
future price than the current spot price. Your \$4,000 deposit grows to
\$13,375 (+\$9,375) while your actual contract value increases from
\$37,500 to \$46,875 when coffee hits \$0.75 after three months (25
percent gain, +\$9,375). Notice that your cash deposit grows more than
the actual 25 percent gain because this was a leveraged position. When
trading on margin or with leveraged options (see Secret #21), your gain
or loss is the price movement of your leveraged position added to or
subtracted from your initial margin deposit. Since you made \$9,375 from
this leveraged position so far, you have an unrealized (unsold and still
in the live market) gain of
$\$ 9,375 \div \$ 4,000 \bullet 100 = 234.375\ percent$. Not bad!
Leveraged positions present huge upside, but they also create huge
downside.

Exclusively in the commodities future contract market, your account is
actually credited \$9,375 from the commodity exchange even though you
have not sold your contract that still has two months until
expiration.[Â²â°]{.mark} The buyer on the other end of this contract was
debited \$9,375 from the exchange in real time since they now have to
pay a higher-than-market price for the coffee you sell them.[Â²âµ]{.mark}
In a traditional stock trade, you do not receive money in your account
until you "cover" your position in a short trade or sell your position
in a long trade (we will talk more about order types in Secret #19). In
essence, you do not gain or lose any money until you close out part or
all of your position in whatever stock, ETF, etc. that you buy or short.
You do not pay taxes on unrealized gains in the stock market at the end
of the year according to capital gains tax rates because you have not
received money from the sale of your asset.[Â²â¶]{.mark} However,
commodities futures differ significantly from equity-market positions
because any gains or losses are credited or debited to your account at
the end of each trading day.[Â²âµ]{.mark} You can still sell your contract
at any time before the last trading day as specified in your futures
contract, but you will see actual cash flow in and out of your account
every day rather than only seeing your position value change on paper.

The government classifies regulated futures contracts as Section 1256
contracts which are taxed using a sixty-forty gain-or-loss
split.[Â²â·]{.mark} Other Section 1256 contracts include:

-   Foreign currency contracts,

-   Nonequity options,

-   Dealer equity options, and

-   Dealer securities futures contracts.[^74^]{.mark}

With this special classification, long-term capital gains rates are
applied to sixty percent of a contract's year-end losses or gains, and
short-term gains rates are applied to forty percent.[Â²â·]{.mark} You
report your year-end futures and all other Section 1256 contract
positions through IRS Form 6781.[Â²â¸]{.mark} This form looks at the
market value of your positions and applies the sixty-forty tax split to
gains and losses.[Â²â¹]{.mark} Note that the wash-sale rules discussed
earlier do not apply to Section 1256 contracts because they are
marked-to-market.[Â²â·]{.mark} Other nonconvertible Section 1256 contracts
include foreign currency contracts, non-equity options, dealer equity
options, and dealer security futures contracts.[Â³â° You will simply copy
your gains and losses from your broker-issued Form 1099-B to pay your
split taxes on these contracts.Â³â°]{.mark}

After calculating your tax liability on unrealized Section 1256 contract
gains or losses, you report your tax liability on Form 1040 supplement
Schedule D.[Â³â°]{.mark} The Schedule D is also where you state your
capital gains and losses as reported by your brokerage through 1099-B
statements. Just follow the steps and calculations from Form 6781 and
Schedule D, and you will be sending in your tax return in no
time.[Â³â°]{.mark} Experience makes these forms go by quicker, as you
learn which parts you can skip and simply leave blank since they do not
apply to your return.[Â³Â¹]{.mark}

Before we go back to our coffee example, let's recap one quick tax law.
As you know, if you hold stock through the end of the year, you will not
have to pay taxes on your unrealized gains or losses.[Â²â¶
However,]{.mark} this tax benefit extends to qualified nonprofits when
you donate equities with unrealized gains to charity without you or the
charity paying any capital gains taxes. You can donate and account for
the full value of stock donations with unrealized gains without you or
the recipient paying the IRS any capital gains taxes.[Â³Â²]{.mark}

If you are purely a speculative trader like most, then you may decide to
cash out your short coffee position now, realizing your significant
gain. To do this, you have your broker submit a "buy-to-open" or long
futures contract order for 37,500 pounds of coffee.[Â²â°]{.mark}

Futures contracts use the same order types as stocks. We will talk about
stock order types in Secret #19. The biggest difference between trading
futures contracts and stocks is that futures contracts:

-   Have a tick size, (minimum amount that a contract can move in value)

-   Are marked to market at the end of the day,

-   Expire by certain dates,

-   Have required order sizes,

-   Deal much more with margin, and

-   Can generally be traded twenty-four hours a day.[Â³Â³]{.mark}

Short and long futures contract trades simply change the owner of the
contract or terminate the contract in exchange for gains and losses if
both parties agree to this option, a less likely outcome since these
two-sided contracts are zero-sum trades that always have a
loser.[Â³â´]{.mark} Nonetheless, exchanges back up contracts in the market
to ensure you get liquidity through automated order-matching
systems.[Â³â´]{.mark}

Let's say you decide to hold your contract after this initial downtrend.
When the price of coffee goes up, your short contract depreciates. Your
actual contract value decreases \$9,375 from \$37,500 to \$28,125 (25
percent loss) while your \$4,000 deposit shrinks to -\$5,375 (234.375
percent loss) when coffee hits \$1.25 during your last two holding
months. Notice that this 234.375 percent loss mirrors your earlier
234.375 percent gain when coffee went down 25 percent. Since you
theoretically sold a contract betting the price would go down, but the
price ended higher, you lost $\$ 37,500 - \$ 28,125 = \$ 9,375$. Your
account has a negative balance because you made this trade on margin and
lost more than your initial margin deposit (i.e. you made a bet with
someone else's money and lost it).

Now we start to see the dangers of trading on margin: you can lose more
than you bet! If you cannot pay back your debt to the lending broker
through cash or asset liquidation, your debt will accrue interest like a
loan taken out to invest. By avoiding margin trading in any asset class
with money you do not have, you ensure your financial security and
protect long-term growth prospects with intelligent investments.

In commodities markets specifically, you can back up your margin
position with expected crop yields as a producer. However, this practice
will still expose you to disastrous risk if your harvest unexpectedly
decreases, leaving you little collateral to cover potential margin
losses. In all capital markets, only risk what you are willing to lose.
Always prepare for the worst so that you can work for the best, sticking
to your overall trading strategy and waiting out for long-term gains or
taking quick short-term ones. Never be afraid to cut a loss, but always
make sure you understand why a position went the wrong way for you, and
ask yourself if you were right to follow your strategy and just got
unlucky. Everyone loses no matter their strategy. Stick to your
principles and learn more about the markets through experience.

In our coffee-farming "hedging" example, we hedged against the risk that
coffee prices would decrease and lower our harvest return by opening a
short futures contract. Even though we lost \$9,375 when coffee's spot
price went from \$1.00 to \$1.25 over the course of our five-month
contract, we can still sell our 37,500 pounds of Arabian coffee at \$1
per pound. Additionally, we can sell the remaining 2,500 pounds at the
\$0.25 higher current spot price in the open market for \$3,125. At the
beginning of this five-month period, we analyzed market trends and grew
fearful that coffee would drop to \$0.70 a pound. Had our prediction
come true, we would be able to sell our beans for much more than the
current market price at the end of our harvest. Although we missed some
potential gains in this example, we also guaranteed a market for our
coffee that locked in our expected harvest revenue, helping us normalize
and protect our farming income in a volatile commodity
market.[Â³âµ]{.mark}

Once our contract term ends and we harvest our coffee, we fulfill our
contract by delivering our beans to the contract buyer. This buyer may
have changed hands in the exchanging market up until the last trading
day specified in our contract. Additionally, the buyer may ask us to
settle a contract in cash to realize a gain or loss before the last
trading day.[Â²â°]{.mark} If we settle profits or losses with cash, we can
then simply sell out beans in the open market at spot price. The
exchange we sell on is responsible for reviewing and verifying the
quality and quantity of our beans or any other commodities.[Â³âµ]{.mark}

Commodity futures are extremely useful for farmers and factories who
want to lock in a market price for materials to minimize
price-volatility risk. You can trade commodities as an investor to
diversify your portfolios, make plays on trends you see in commodity
market price actions, and profit from volatility and active technical
analysis (we will talk more about diversification in Secret #35). To
trade commodities, use the following order format for futures contracts:

$$Order = Underlying\ asset\ symbol + month\ code + one\ or\ two\ digit\ year$$

Month Codes:

  -------- --------- --------- -------- --------- -------- ------------ --------
           Jan       Feb       Mar      Apr       May      June         July

  Code     F         G         H        J         K        M            N

           Aug       Sept      Oct      Nov       Dec      Cash / Spot  

  Code     Q         U         V        X         Z        A0 if        
                                                           applicable   
  -------- --------- --------- -------- --------- -------- ------------ --------

Â³â¶

As you may notice, these letters correlate to the QWERTY keyboard
layout, increasing in order as months pass by. After the initial five
months, the month codes follow horizontal lines across the keyboard to
streamline trading.[Â³â·]{.mark} Additionally, the month-code letters are
not easily confused with numbers, look-alike letters, or like-sounding
letters.[Â³â¶]{.mark} Using these codes shortens the time taken to find a
contract, enter an order, and execute a trade.

Examples:

Silver December 2019 Contract: SIZ9

Where

-   SI represents Silver,

-   Z represents the expiration month December, and

-   9 represents the expiration year 2019

Two-Year Treasury September 2018 Contract: TUU8 [Â³â·]{.mark}

Where

-   TU represents two-year Treasury notes,

-   U represents the expiration month September, and

-   8 represents the expiration year 2018

Many other secondary-market futures contracts exist for a wide range of
underlying assets or derivatives.[Â³â¸]{.mark} However, many of these
futures, such as Treasury-note contracts, serve as a more complicated
and tax-involved means to profit from movements in an underlying asset.
Try to stick with direct assets exclusively if available to simplify
your overall portfolio, taxes, accounting, trade orders, and more. You
may even realize tax advantages to trading underlying assets as opposed
to derivate futures contracts since you can qualify for full long-term
capital gains and ignore mark-to-market taxes on unrealized gains.
Alternatively, futures contracts can help lower your active-trading tax
liability if you constantly trade equity indices or perhaps
foreign-exchange futures rather than the underlying indices or
currencies by applying the earlier-discussed sixty-forty tax split to
your profits rather than straight short-term capital gains.

Major commodity markets generally make poor long-term investments. To
understand this viewpoint, let's look at the historical performance of
silver, gold, the S&P 500, the Dow Jones, and the Wilshire Large-Cap
Index. The Wilshire is a total return index which includes dividends.
The index tracks the 750 largest market-cap companies in the Wilshire
5000 Total Market Index and assumes that you reinvest
dividends.[â´â°]{.mark}

![](media/image21.png){width="4.75in" height="2.68in"}

[â´Â¹]{.mark}

From highest to lowest final percent return, we see the Wilshire
Large-Cap, Dow Jones Industrial Average, S&P 500, Gold, and Silver.

This chart analyzes asset performance since 1985. Notice that in the
2008 subprime mortgage crash, metal prices rallied.[â´Â¹]{.mark} In market
downturns, investors tend to purchase safer assets like gold or bonds,
whereas they buy riskier speculative investments in upturns.[â´Â²
â´Â³]{.mark} Buying gold futures contracts during the 2008 crash would
have yielded a great shorter-term gain, but this was also a terrific
time to invest in stocks for the long-term. According to this data, gold
increased around ninety-one percent at its peak from the time the stock
market bottomed, while the \^DJI increased around eighty-five percent in
the same time period.[â´Â¹]{.mark} However, gold peaked and reversed in
2011 whereas the \^DJI keep increasing, now yielding around a 271
percent gain from the "buy-gold bottoms."[â´Â¹]{.mark} Note that silver
increased 223 percent from the market bottom to its peaks,
too.[â´Â¹]{.mark} Silver has historically been much more volatile than
gold.[â´â´]{.mark} In the short-term, you can most definitely outperform
the market through futures contracts, but you should try to time them as
informed, researched trades rather than long-term investments.

Many ETFs track commodity prices alongside other baskets of less
traditional investments in well-diversified portfolios containing many
underlying assets from across a niche market spectrum (we will talk more
about diversification in Secret #35).[Â³â¹]{.mark} You can use these tools
to invest in commodities without going through contract hassles.

Here are more historical commodity performance examples comparing
farmable, extractable, and precious commodities to the S&P 500, the most
conservative of the three major US indices.

![Points scored](media/image22.png){width="4.75in" height="2.93in"}

From highest to lowest final return, we see the S&P 500 (\$1,584.49),
Sugar (\$304.75), Soybeans (\$151.58), Wheat (\$143.44), Oats
(\$139.82), Corn (\$134.34), Cotton (\$115.64), Orange Juice (\$88.53),
and Coffee (\$77.52).

â´âµ â´â¶ â´â· â´â¸ â´â¹ âµâ° âµÂ¹ âµÂ² âµÂ³ âµâ´

![Extracted Commodities vs. the S&P
500](media/image23.png){width="4.75in" height="2.93in"}

From highest to lowest final return, we see the S&P 500 (\$1,584.49),
Brent Crude Oil (\$357.33), WTI Crude Oil (\$301.32), Crude Oil
(\$258.78), and Natural Gas (\$256.55).

â´âµ âµâµ âµâ¶ âµâ· âµâ¸ âµâ¹

![Precious Metals vs. the S&P 500](media/image24.png){width="4.75in"
height="2.93in"}

From highest to lowest final return, we see the S&P 500 (\$1,584.49),
Palladium (\$249.93), Gold (\$397.49), Rhodium (\$300.73), Copper
(\$283.79), Platinum (\$249.93), and Silver (\$230.52).

â´âµ â¶â° â¶Â¹ â¶Â² â¶Â³ â¶â´ [â¶âµ]{.mark}

For a frame of reference in the above graphs, please note that \$100 in
1985 has the same purchasing power as \$239.70 today (2018).[â¶â¶]{.mark}

You can significantly outperform the market with riskier commodity
investments in the short term, but all of these volatile commodities,
many failing to even beat inflation, underperform the American
powerhouse economy in the long term. As markets keep growing and
consumers keep spending, stocks continue to expand and create wealth for
shareholders through dividends and capital gains. Equities are the true
key to asset growth.

With commodities, remember that these investments reflect a price change
due to supply and demand. A bar of gold will always be a simple bar of
gold, whereas an index fund is made up of corporations built and run by
people working every day to increase shareholder value. With this said,
keep commodities in your trading repertoire. If you spend time searching
for setups, you can most definitely find them. These positions,
especially in a down market, are an excellent way to diversify your
overall portfolio alongside traditional swing trades if you only want to
put a medium amount of time into managing your assets (we will further
explore diversification in Secret #35).

---

Transitioning from commodities to currencies, we enter a
twenty-four-hour market that moves trillions of dollars every single
day.[â¶â·]{.mark} Currency, foreign exchange, or forex markets simply
reflect changing political and social values in a country's currency
(ignoring cryptocurrencies). These exchanges are necessary to facilitate
international travel and commerce, and they create highly-traded
speculative markets affected by innate currency inflation and deflation.

Because of their volatility, foreign currencies rarely act as reliable
long-term investments. Rather, many use these assets alongside
commodities as safe havens for cash in bad markets. You can take
advantage of down markets and increased worldwide political tensions by
swing trading foreign currencies.[â¶â¸]{.mark} By timing these markets,
you can make average profits with minimal research, playing off
instincts, worldwide news, and your overall technical analysis skill set
developed in Part Two.[â¶â¸]{.mark}

The daily percentage price movements in forex currencies are generally
much lower than those of nine-to-noon stocks.[Â³]{.mark} You can use
technical analysis to find winning positions in forex stocks just as you
can with most stocks. However, percent returns in forex and some
particularly volatile stocks generally pale in comparison to
nine-to-noon gains. I compare currencies to actively-managed stocks
because they are generally much more volatile investments than
diversified stock portfolios, as shown below, and they therefore require
more active monitoring.

To get an idea of the sideways currency exchange markets, let's look at
seven major currency trading pairs and the US Dollar Index, a measure of
US Dollar value relative to a basket of foreign currencies, from 1990 to
today:

![](media/image25.png){width="4.75in" height="2.78in"}

[â¶â¹]{.mark}

From highest to lowest final percent change, we see the Japanese Yen/US
Dollar, Swiss Franc/US Dollar, Australian Dollar/US Dollar, Euro/US
Dollar, US Dollar Index, Canadian Dollar/US Dollar, British Pound/US
Dollar, and Mexican Peso/US Dollar.

In general, these markets move sideways particularly slowly compared to
equity markets, especially due to economic-release slowdowns, holidays,
seasonal factors, and overall currency indecision.[â·â°]{.mark} We see
large movements in some currencies, but these are relatively small
trades based on macroeconomic factors.[â¶â¹]{.mark} Though there is no
clear-cut "better" investment vehicle for active trading, you will see
significantly stronger, predictably-timely setups in nine-to-noon stocks
rather than forex.[â·Â¹]{.mark} Nine-to-noon stocks may move hundreds of
percentage points in a day, whereas foreign currencies may move a few
percentage points in comparison.[â·Â² â·Â³]{.mark} Keep forex in your mind
as a swing-trading option like commodities, but focus on equities for
asset accumulation (see Secret #36).

For reference, here is the previous currency price data from 1990
compared to the S&P 500:

![](media/image26.png){width="4.75in" height="2.55in"}

[â¶â¹]{.mark}

##  Market Dynamics and the 7 Order Types

When you buy a stock, you send your broker an order. The type of order
you submit determines what price you buy or sell at alongside how
quickly your trade executes. Additionally, you can use some orders types
as trading utilities to strengthen your risk-management and
technical-analysis skills.

Market Order

> What you select:
>
> Ticker
>
> Buy/sell/short/cover
>
> Number of shares
>
> When the order executes:
>
> Immediately at the market price (physical electronic signal travel
> times may slow your order down by a few microseconds).[â¶]{.mark}
>
> How the order executes:
>
> You buy from the cheapest seller on the ask or
>
> You sell to the cheapest buyer on the bid.
>
> In practice, market orders work like less-predictable limit orders
> that execute more reliably in fast price changes, although you may buy
> or sell into a wider bid-ask spread.

[Â¹]{.mark}

Limit Order

> What you select:
>
> Ticker
>
> Buy/sell/short/cover
>
> Number of shares
>
> Price
>
> When the order executes:
>
> Send to market immediately. Filled as soon as someone buys or sells at
> your designated price or better.
>
> How the order executes:
>
> Once you submit your order with a specific price, it appears in the
> market's bid or ask, market depth, level 2, etc. (as discussed
> earlier). You are "filled" once someone buys or sells to your open
> order that can be above or below the current market price. With most
> brokerages, your order will automatically be filled at cheaper prices
> than your limit-buy order (or sold at prices higher than your
> limit-sell order) if better prices are available in the market's order
> book.

[Â²]{.mark}

Market-If-Touched Order (Form of a Stop Order)

> What you select:
>
> Ticker
>
> Buy/sell/short/cover
>
> Number of shares
>
> Trigger price
>
> When the order executes:
>
> When the last traded price hits your designated price level.
>
> How the order executes:
>
> In a buy order, you pick a level below the last price. When the stock
> hits this level, you market buy the specified number of shares.
> Similarly, you pick a level above the current price in a sell order.
> When the stock hits this level, you market sell the specified number
> of shares.

[Â³]{.mark}

Stop Order

> What you select:
>
> Ticker
>
> Buy/sell/short/cover
>
> Number of shares
>
> Trigger price
>
> When the order executes:
>
> When the last trading price hits your specified price level.
>
> How the order executes:
>
> These orders close out your current positions when a stock moves to a
> predetermined price. Once the last-traded price of a stock hits the
> price level that you specify, you sell or buy the given number of
> shares in an automated market order (to close a losing position and
> limit your losses).

[â´]{.mark}

Stop-Limit Order

> What you select:
>
> Ticker
>
> Buy/sell/short/cover
>
> Number of shares
>
> Trigger price
>
> Order price
>
> When the order executes:
>
> When the last trading price hits your specified price level.
>
> How the order executes:
>
> Your broker issues a limit order into the market only once the last
> sale price reaches your stop price. You can set your limit-buy or sell
> price to be higher or lower than your trigger price (which makes the
> order active when the market hits it) just in case the price moves
> quickly past your designated order price and you still want to get out
> of a losing trade. Your order will be filled at the best price your
> broker can find in the market relative to your execution price.Â¹Â³ You
> might see fast price movements, especially in nine-to-noon stocks, if
> you set your stop-loss at a support or resistance level (as we will
> explore in Secret #24). Therefore, automatic stop-losses with price
> flexibility ensure that you get out of a failing trade before
> potential losses compound.

[âµ]{.mark}

Trailing-Stop-Loss Order

> What you select:
>
> Ticker
>
> Buy/sell/short/cover
>
> Number of shares
>
> Trailing amount
>
> When the order executes:
>
> When the last trading price hits your specified trailing price level.
>
> How the order executes:
>
> You set an initial stop-loss alongside a trailing amount. In a long
> trade, the stop-loss level increases according to the trailing amount.
> For example, you buy at \$10 and set a stop at \$9 with a \$1 trailing
> stop. If prices increase to \$13, then your stop-loss increases to
> \$12. However, the stop-loss in a long-trade will never decrease after
> a new high is hit. Reverse this information for a short trade.

[â·]{.mark}

Conditional Orders

> What you select:
>
> Ticker
>
> Buy/sell/short/cover
>
> Number of shares
>
> Conditions (the number of conditions and extent of such conditions
> depends on your broker)
>
> When the order executes:
>
> Once all of your conditions are met. These orders are a great way to
> ensure your swing trades execute exactly where you want even though
> you might not be able to actively monitor your positions.
>
> How the order executes:
>
> First, decide whether you want to buy or sell at market or at a
> specific price. Then, establish your conditions. Should your order
> only execute if the price falls to X support level? Perhaps you want
> to automatically sell half of your position at Y resistance level (we
> will explore supports and resistances in Secret #24). Maybe you want
> prices to reach a certain level an hour after opening volatility
> fades. Perhaps you have a particularly large position and want to take
> profits off the table after prices increase ten percent. Look at the
> conditional options your broker gives you and see if they fit with
> your trading style, allowing you to establish a setup and let your
> broker fill it when prices are just right.

[â¸ â¹ Â¹â°]{.mark}

Stop-losses set a maximum amount you can lose in a trade, acting as a
terrific way to mitigate risk. You set a trigger price for either a
market stop-loss or a stop-limit order. Once a stock trades at this
price level, your order automatically enters the market. This speed is
especially helpful when you want to quickly enter or exit a position.

You can place your stop-loss trigger price below the current price to
limit your losses in case a long trade goes south. Similarly, you can
place stop buy orders above the current market price to limit your
losses in a short position.[Â¹Â¹]{.mark} You should set your stop price
based either on your risk tolerance (how much you are willing to lose on
any given position in the short-term) or technical analysis. With trades
based on technical analysis, try to set your stop-loss at a price that
proves your trading setup or indicators invalid (we talk more about
technical analysis in Part Two).[Â¹Â²]{.mark} Your limit-sell stop-loss
order should effectively close trades that are prime to lose you more
cash, but they should also allow enough wiggle room for your position to
continue longer-term movement despite brief pullbacks or run-ups.

Market stop-loss orders ensure that you liquidate a position in case the
price action quickly moves past your stop level (i.e. critical supports
and resistances in nine-to-noon trading).[Â¹â´]{.mark} For long-term
investing in more stable stocks, stop-limit orders generally work well
enough for protecting profits or limiting losses and guarantee your
closing price. In relatively stable stocks, try to wait a few seconds in
nine-to-noon trades or a few days in long-term investments to see if a
stock will correct itself away from an extreme once you have enough
trading experience and willpower cut a bad positon without a hard
stop-loss. We will talk more about price levels, supports, resistances,
momentum indicators, and price bands that will help you with this
technical analysis in Part Two.

In most scenarios, limit orders are the best way to enter and exit a
position. Limit orders are the most consistent and reliable order type
because you designate exactly where your trade executes. With this
guarantee, you can always know how much you will pay for a position or
make from its sale. Especially in illiquid markets with large bid-ask
spreads, limit orders at the top of the bid or bottom of the ask can
save you significant percentage points in your trades.

Shave percentage points off the cost basis of your trades and increase
your long-term profitability by consistently buying with limit orders
near the bid for a small discount or selling with limit orders near the
ask for slight premium over market prices.

With that said, market orders can be extremely useful in nine-to-noon
trading. When prices move quickly in fast-paced trades, you may not have
enough time to enter a specific price before a stock shoots past it. In
these scenarios, the increased execution speed provided by market orders
can help you enter or exit extremely volatile positions. For instance,
let's say you find a very promising stock. This was a \$4 stock
yesterday, but the underlying company released stellar news last night
and are about to open at \$5.20. At 9:20, you look at key historical
support and resistance levels and determine that this stock is a prone
high-flier for the day since it just broke through its toughest
historical support (we will talk more about supports and resistances in
Secret #24). The opening bell rings. The stock starts to skyrocket.
Prices just keep ticking higher and higher within the first ten seconds
of trading. Since prices do not slow down long enough for you to
calculate the number of shares you should buy and type in a price for
those shares, a market order with an approximate number of shares can
ensure you get skin in the stock before it soars too high. Still, use
these orders sparingly as they can be unpredictable and set your orders
back up to a few percentage points with some particularly poor fills.

For long-term investing, market-if-touched orders can be a great way to
automatically purchase a stock if it significantly and quickly drops,
whereas market-if-touched sell orders to lock in gains if a stock
significantly and quickly rises. These orders are great to set at a
price you think you the market would never fill you at unless a panic
quickly and temporarily moves a stock in one direction. For example,
there was an extremely large, unnaturally-rapid, single-day selloff in
the Invesco QQQ Trust on August 24, 2015, as shown below. With a
market-if-touched order, you could instantly lock in a position as the
market irrationally dropped without ever needing to constantly monitor
the price level. As you might notice, this day's extremely large red
volume candle further emphasizes this buying opportunity.

![](media/image27.png){width="4.75in" height="2.09in"}

[Â¹âµ]{.mark}

You might not be watching \$QQQ on this one day when the fund dropped
twenty percent, so your automated order ensures you take part in the
drop opportunity.Â¹âµ Still, remember to check up on your long-term open
orders periodically so that you do not forget about an order in which
market sentiment on the underlying asset slowly changed (i.e. it no
longer makes sense to buy or sell at the market-if-touched order price).

##  Growth Tactics with Active Trader Status

If you trade nine-to-noon, then you can qualify for special tax
treatment in futures, equities, and other asset markets that allows you
to deduct many of your trading expenses that would otherwise go taxed.

The following specialty tax treatment does not apply to you if the IRS
classifies you as an investor. You are an investor if:

-   Buy and sell securities,

-   Expect dividend income or interest,

-   Expect capital appreciation,

-   Hold securities for personal investment (not for a business), and

-   Hold most investments for a substantial period of time.[Â¹]{.mark}

As an investor, you pay for your access to investment asset growth
through the American stock market when you sell securities. You report
your capital gains and losses on Form 1040 supplement Schedule D. If
your broker-provided 1099-B is incomplete, then you also file Form 8949
to report your security sales.[Â¹]{.mark} Subtract your yearly taxable
capital losses from your yearly taxable capital gains to find how much
you owe at the end of an investing year.

As an investor, you can deduct up to \$3,000 of losses that exceed gains
from your income (\$1,500 if married filing separately, 2018).[Â² If you
still have excess losses after considering the wash sale rule discussed
earlier, then you can carry your loss deduction indefinitely into future
tax years.Â³ Brokerage commissions are included in your capital gains and
losses as part of your positions' price bases, and investment income is
not subject to self-employment tax.Â¹]{.mark}

[It is very difficult to qualify as a trader unless you trade
nine-to-noon.âµ If you classify as an investor but still want to wiggle
out of some capital gains taxes, do not worry. We will get to entity
formation in just a moment. With that said, let's move onto active
trader tax status.]{.mark}

[You can qualify for this special treatment if you buy and sell
securities for your own account and:]{.mark}

-   [Seek to profit from daily market volatility (not dividends,
    interest, or capital appreciation),]{.mark}

-   [Have substantial trading activity, and]{.mark}

-   [Carry on the activity with continuity and regularity.Â¹]{.mark}

If you cannot clearly decide if you qualify for this status, also
consider:

-   Typical holding periods for securities (shorter is better, but
    always give your trades time to work),

-   The frequency of your trades (higher is better for diversification
    and maximum opportunities, but try to start with quality setups),

-   The dollar amount of your trades (higher is better, but always stay
    within your risk tolerance),

-   The extent to which you pursue the activity to produce income for a
    livelihood, and

-   The amount of time you devote to the activity.[Â¹]{.mark}

If you meet these qualifications, congratulations! You can now record
your active gains and losses as a business. This preferred tax status
stands independent of the markets you trade, so you can be an active
trader in the stock market but only an investor in the futures market.[Â¹
Keep detailed records with your broker separating your investor
positions from your trader positions to minimize your taxes. You can
easily isolate your nine-to-noon trading with a separate brokerage
account from your long-term investments.Â¹]{.mark}

As an active trader, you get to report and deduct your necessary and
ordinary business expenses alongside your trading income on Form 1040
supplement Schedule C, Profit or Loss From Business (Sole
Proprietorship).[Â¹ On top of that, you still do not have to pay
self-employment taxes on your income. As an active trader, you can use
your Schedule C to deduct the cost of:]{.mark}

-   [Trading software,]{.mark}

-   [Investment advice,]{.mark}

-   [Interest paid (e.g. margin interest which you will faithfully
    avoid),]{.mark}

-   [Bank fees,]{.mark}

-   [Equipment (e.g. computers, monitors, desks, bookshelves, etc. that
    you use more than fifty percent of the time for trading),]{.mark}

-   [Research tools,]{.mark}

-   [Educational content (e.g. books, seminars, etc.),]{.mark}

-   [Internet access,]{.mark}

-   [Market data fees,]{.mark}

-   [Startup costs (like this book!),]{.mark}

-   [Home-office costs (maximum 2018 home office deduction is \$1,500
    per year with the largest-deductible 300-square-foot home officeâ¸),
    and]{.mark}

-   [Any other trading-related business expense including transport
    costs, standard driving cost deductions, business meals, lodging,
    etc.â¶ â·]{.mark}

As a standard investor, you cannot deduct any of these expenses from
your trading income outside of electing to itemize deductions. As we
talked about earlier, you can deduct certain investment expenses on the
Schedule A that exceed two percent of your adjusted gross income
(Phasing out in 2018! See Secret #8). With active trader status, you can
directly deduct expenses and loses from your trading-business Schedule-C
income.[Â¹]{.mark}

Because all of your active-trader losses become ordinary loses from your
business, you also need not worry about maximum yearly deductible
losses. With that said, commissions are still considered part of your
cost basis, but profits and losses are exempt from self-employment tax
(Social Security and Medicare taxes).[Â¹]{.mark} [â¹]{.mark}

Alongside the benefit of deducting business expenses with Active Trader
Status, you can file a section 475(f) election, the mark-to-market
election.[Â¹ This election applies to your mark-to-market status to both
your personal investments and business active-trading income. With a
mark-to-market election under section 475(f), you consider all of your
positions closed on paper at the end of the year, and all of your
capital gains and losses turn into ordinary income.Â¹â° You then pay taxes
on all of your realized and unrealized gains that year in your
return.]{.mark}

[Mark-to-market accounting prevents you from deferring taxes and
prolonging tax-free asset growth. With a section 475(f) election, you
will have to pay out of your pocket for long-term unrealized gains.
After you pay taxes on your open active-trader positions based on the
last business-day closing price of held positions, the new tax basis for
the underlying investments is the year-end fair market value.Â¹ You can
only make the market-to-market election once, and it is almost
impossible to unelect.Â¹]{.mark}

[You might make a mark-to-market election as an active-trader-status
individual if you want to:]{.mark}

1.  [Bypass the wash-sale rule]{.mark} which disallows long-term or
    short-term capital gain liability deductions from losses when you
    sell for a loss and buy the same stock or a "substantially
    identical" security back within 30 days of the sale

> [or]{.mark}

2.  [Deduct an unlimited amount of losses per year.Â¹]{.mark}

[If you deduct a significant business loss, you can even carry your net
operating loss back two years and forward twenty.Â¹â° This loss can also
lower any other taxable income since the Schedule C return is part of
your individual return.Â¹â°]{.mark}

[With that said, you will almost exclusively attain active trader status
only when you trade nine-to-noon.Â¹â¸ Mark-to-market accounting might make
more sense for you if you constantly trade the same stocks over and
over. However, nine-to-noon stocks constantly change, and you rarely
need to worry about the wash-sale rule because you are always trading
different premarket gainers (we will explore how to find these stocks in
Secret #36). Additionally, you trade actively to make money. If you
consistently lose at the end of the year while actively pursuing your
education, trading practice, and self-discipline, then you might not
want to actively trade. Using the technical analysis techniques we will
explore in Part Two, you will learn to be consistently profitable when
actively trading, so you will not need to worry about deducting over
\$3,000 per year in losses. If you fear a large market crash one year,
weigh the cost of permanently paying taxes on unrealized active gains
against the benefit of deducting an entire yearly loss rather than only
\$3,000 (2018 limit). We will look at using business entities soon to
get around active-trader qualification stipulations.]{.mark}

As an investor, you report gains and losses on your Schedule D and Form
8949. As a trader, you report gains and losses on Form 4797 if and only
if you make a mark-to-market election, securing your sales as ordinary
gains and losses. (Not investment sales. A mark-to-market election
protects your clearly separated long-term investments from active-tax
status).^1^

Individually, you have to claim mark-to-market accounting by the due
date of your personal tax return (tax day) one year before the change
takes effect by attaching a statement either to your income tax return
or request for an extension of time to file your return.^1^ This
prevents individuals from claiming mark-to-market status immediately
after a large loss. However, you can elect mark-to-market accounting
immediately when you start a business.[Â¹â¹]{.mark}

If you elect mark-to-market accounting, your business trading becomes
ordinary income taxed on your return, after deductions, as income.
However, this makes little difference thanks to the similarities between
short-term-capital-gains taxes and income taxes, as shown below.

  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
    Short-Term                                                
  Capital Gains                                               
     Tax Rate                                                 
      (2018)                                                  

                     Single     Married Filing    Head of     Married Filing
                                   Jointly       Household      Separately

       Rate        and income                                 
                   above\...                                  

       10%            \$0            \$0            \$0            \$0

       12%          \$9,525        \$19,050       \$13,600       \$9,525

       22%          \$38,700       \$77,400       \$51,800       \$38,700

       24%          \$82,500      \$165,000       \$82,500       \$82,500

       32%         \$157,500      \$315,000      \$157,500      \$157,500

       35%         \$200,000      \$400,000      \$200,000      \$200,000

       37%         \$500,000      \$600,000      \$500,000      \$300,000
  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------

[Â¹Â¹]{.mark}

  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
    Income Tax                                                
   Rate (2018)                                                

                     Single     Married Filing    Head of     Married Filing
                                   Jointly       Household      Separately

       Rate        and income                                 
                   above\...                                  

       10%            \$0            \$0            \$0            \$0

       12%          \$9,525        \$19,050       \$13,600       \$9,525

       22%          \$38,700       \$77,400       \$51,800       \$38,700

       24%          \$82,500      \$165,000       \$82,500       \$82,500

       32%         \$157,500      \$315,000      \$157,500      \$157,500

       35%         \$200,000      \$400,000      \$200,000      \$200,000

       37%         \$500,000      \$600,000      \$500,000      \$300,000
  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------

[Â¹Â²]{.mark}

(Notice that they are the exact same, so you end up paying the same tax
rate, but you can deduct all ordinary and necessary business expenses.)

If you elect to use mark-to-market accounting as an individual or
business, you must also file Form 3115 with your timely notice. Your
timely notice must state:

-   That you are making an election under section 475(f),

-   The first tax year for which the election is effective, and

-   The trade or business for which you are making the election (make
    sure you explicitly separate investments from trades. You will
    essentially only get approval if you consistently trade
    nine-to-noon).^1^

However, do not file Form 3115 at the same time you make a
mark-to-market election. Rather, file Form 3115 to change your method of
accounting for securities when you file your first year's tax return
using mark-to-market accounting, as specified in your previous notice.

Like we said earlier, you can try to stop using mark-to-market
accounting for securities by filing an automatic request for revocation
under Revenue Procedure 2017-30, Section 23.02 by the original due date
of your return, but these requests are usually denied.^1^

One last special tax trick you can pull as an active trader is claiming
a Section 179 deduction and writing off up to \$1,000,000 a year for
equipment used in trading activities (rather than amortizing or
depreciating the equipment along a curve like the Modified Accelerated
Cost Recovery System) (though you cannot force your trading business
into a loss) (2018).[Â¹â´]{.mark}

Active trader status creates an individual sole-proprietorship under
which you trade (though you do not pay self-employment taxes). If your
trading gets especially serious, you might want to protect your assets
and further reduce your tax bill by creating an actual trading business
entity that you "work at." This way, the assets your manage are not
actually yours if someone sues you.

By creating a Limited Liability Company or Corporation, you can avoid
the hassle of qualifying as an active trader.[Â¹âµ You can always deduct
business expenses as a separate entity. Additionally, you can dissolve
your entity at any time, perhaps to stop using mark-to-market accounting
for your trades.Â¹âµ If you want to use mark-to-market, you can start
using the accounting when you form your business rather than waiting a
year since it is just another form of business accounting.Â¹â°]{.mark}

[LLCs have flexible tax structures, so you can treat the entity as a
sole-proprietorship, partnership, S corporation, or C corporation.
Corporations simply stand as the two latter options. LLCs formed under
the former three classifications can qualify for the 20 percent
Qualified Business Income Deduction if you meet the income limitations
under Provision 11011 Section 199A of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.Â¹â· This
directly lowers the amount of taxable income you report since you
operate a specified trade or business in investment management and
trading.Â¹â·]{.mark}

[However, as an S corporation or C corporation, you will have to pay
yourself reasonable pay from the business which is subject to payroll
taxes. However, you can take a K-1 distribution of profits from an S
corporation that counts as income exclusively, bypassing social security
and Medicare taxes. With a C corporation, you can take dividends from
your company.]{.mark}

[Remember that you can also hire your family as "employees" of your
corporation. With this strategy, you can use your increased flexibility
in accounting to fund your children's colleges with tax-free profits,
cover deductible medical expenses, and distribute money to your family
with pre-tax dollars through many other accounting tricks like ERISA
pension funds and newfound 401(a) Plans.Â¹âµ]{.mark}

[One final tax strategy involves combining LLCs and corporations. While
maintaining limited liability and separate assets, you can charge a
C-Corporation royalty to the underlying LLC as a business expense.Â¹â¶ The
combination structure is used in very limited circumstances to utilize
the advantages of each type of business.Â¹â¶]{.mark}

Consider opening a business entity for your significant active trading.
Consider whether a 20 percent qualified business income deduction makes
more sense than the added accounting and business-expense flexibility of
a corporation or LLC taxed as a corporation. S-corporation distributions
in particular help you take cash out of your trading after deducting any
business expense you can conjure up.

##  A World of Optional Opportunities

Options give you the right but not the obligation to buy or sell an
underlying security. You pay an "option premium" for the right to trade
an asset at a previously agreed upon price by a specified date.[Â¹ You
can use options to hedge against risk when you own an underlying
position or trade calls and puts independently for potential profits.
Calls and puts simply stand as buy or sell options traded similarly to
futures contracts.]{.mark}

[Call options give you the right to purchase an underlying asset by a
specified date at the strike price. When you buy calls or puts, your
initial investment is nonrefundable. An option premium will cost more if
the strike price is closer to the spot price.Â³ You will also pay more
for options with later expiration dates since the underlying asset has
more time to reach the strike price. Lastly, the cost to buy an option
may increase as the volatility of the underlying asset
increases.Â³]{.mark}

[Put options give you the right to sell an underlying asset by a
specified date at the strike price. Calls (buy) and puts (sell) are
executed only when you tell your broker to execute a trade. There is
often an exchange fee to exercise an option, but the only other cost in
options trading is the premium price.â´ You can control an underlying
asset to a limited extent without actually owning it.]{.mark}

[When you execute a call option, you want to buy the asset once prices
rise above the spot price so you can sell them for higher prices in the
open market. When you execute a put option, you want to sell the asset
at the spot price when you can buy the asset at a lower market
value.Â²]{.mark}

[When purchasing a stock option, you pay a premium to control the right
to buy or sell an underlying stock during the contract period. By
default, stock options encompass 100 shares of any given company.Â¹ Some
other option types include ETF options, index options, and options on
futures.Â¹â´ By paying an option premium, the most you risk on your bet
about the underlying stock is the premium price. In a call, your options
contract expires worthless if the price never reaches above the spot
price. In a put, your contract expires worthless if the price never
drops below the spot price.Â¹ Options are leveraged instruments that
offer amplified gains.Â¹â· You risk absolutely everything you bet when you
buy an options contract.]{.mark}

---

[We will look at trading options alone soon, but first, let's explore
how you can use them to protect unrealized gains and draw cash flow out
of existing investments.]{.mark}

[A covered call strategy assumes you own a stock for a long-term
investment. If you are confident about the underlying company, but you
do not think the stock will rise much in the short term, you can sell a
call option to the marketplace at a strike price around ten or fifteen
percent above the current stock price (whatever price seems reasonable
and unlikely to occur to you).âµ Since someone will pay you a premium to
buy the call option you sell, you can generate cash from your long-term
positions as long as you correctly predict price movements.]{.mark}

[The best-case scenario in a covered call is that your stock stays flat.
Here, your underlying position loses no value, and you get to keep the
premium from the unexercised option. If the stock price falls, the
premium paid for the call option acts as a hedge that pays you for some
of the losses in your underlying stock. In both of these scenarios, you
make extra cash flow by taking on the risk to sell a call option to the
marketplace. By using technical analysis (which we will explore in Part
Two), you can minimize this risk.]{.mark}

[In a worst-case covered-call scenario, the stock price increases above
the strike price. The option buyer exercises the call option when they
see fit before the expiration date to make a profit while you miss out
on gains above the strike price (option exercise time frame depends on
option types; we will look at different types soon). You still profit
from the stock run-up and option premium, but you have to sell your
shares under market value to the option buyer who paid for the right to
purchase the shares at the strike price.âµ]{.mark}

[You can also use a protective put to protect your long holdings against
downturns.â¶ If you think prices will increase, you can protect against
an unlucky short-term downtrend through a put option while still owning
the stock. With this put, you will still be able to reap rewards if your
stock appreciates or pays dividends, but you will also have a guaranteed
selling price at the option strike price if the market turns down. You
will pay an option premium no matter how the stock moves, presumably out
of existing profits. If the stock goes up as you intend, then your
option will go unexecuted and you will only lose the premium paid from
your newfound profits.â¶]{.mark}

[This strategy limits your maximum loss to the strike price you are
guaranteed to sell at in the given time frame since you can execute your
option if prices tumble below the strike price. However, unlike a
stop-loss, you can keep this position open until the option expires if
you want, giving the stock time to recover and move towards new highs
without forcing you to risk losing any more money during the option
period]{.mark} (assuming American option; see below)[.]{.mark}

[Remember the two types of options as you trade covered calls,
protective puts, and standalone options: American and European. American
options can be executed at any time before the expiration date, whereas
European options cannot be executed until the expiration date.Â² American
options give you the most trading flexibility, and your broker will
usually execute your options for you on expiration date if the contract
is in the money.Â² Most options are traded before expiration to obtain
optimal profits by using technical analysis to find maximum and minimum
prices (see Part Two).Â¹â¶]{.mark}

[Here are two charts to show your potential upside and downside with a
covered call and protective put, assuming either option has underlying
long holdings:]{.mark}

[Sell Call at A:]{.mark}

![](media/image28.png){width="3.0in" height="2.34in"}

[Â²Â²]{.mark}

[This covered call forces you to sell your shares for a profit if prices
increase, but you also get cash from the marketplace for incurring this
risk. For long-term stocks that do not pay dividends, you can use your
technical analysis skills from Part Two to identify downward-trending
periods and sell calls to generate investment income from your
holdings.]{.mark}

[Buy Put at A:]{.mark}

![](media/image29.png){width="3.0in" height="2.34in"}

[Â²Â³]{.mark}

[This protective put limits your downside, but you need not worry about
actually exiting your position if prices do decrease. Rather, you can
execute your option when market timing optimizes your profits while you
decide whether to continue holding the underlying stock for the long
term.]{.mark}

[Here is an example of a live option chain for Facebook, Inc. expiring
on December 28, 2018. Notice that bars along the edge of the options
chain emphasize puts and calls in the money. The puts shown are live
options contracts to sell \$FB while calls are options to buy the stock
in the future.]{.mark}

![](media/image30.jpg){width="4.744529746281715in"
height="2.372265966754156in"}

[Rest of chain:]{.mark}

![](media/image31.jpg){width="2.6834897200349954in"
height="4.549451006124235in"}

[Â²â°]{.mark}

[This chain shows open trades for the December 28, 2018 expiration date
for \$FB. The "last price" represents how much you would pay per share
for the given option premium at market (or how much you can sell your
contract for to take early profits). Because each contract represents
100 shares, the total options premium for one lot is]{.mark}
$last\ price \bullet 100\ shares$ [where the last price represents the
last premium paid to a contract seller at a given strike price and
expiration date. Given the last prices from the option chain, a \$130
\$FB call (buy) would cost]{.mark}
$\$ 1.55 \bullet 100\ shares = \$ 155$ [while a \$120 \$FB put (sell)
would cost]{.mark} $\$ 2.00 \bullet 100\ shares = \$ 200$ [(all
contracts expiring December 28, 2018). If you bought a call and \$FB
increased to say \$140 in say a one month contract, you would
profit]{.mark}
$(\$ 140\ market - \ \$ 130\ call - \$ 1.55\ premium)*100 = \$ 845\ per\ contract$[.
Inversely, if you bought the put and \$FB decreased to \$110 in a one
month contract, you would profit]{.mark}
$(\$ 120\ put\  - \ \$ 110\ market\  - \ \$ 2\ premium)*100\ shares = \$ 800\ per\ contract$
[given the above market prices shown in the option chain. Note that
disproportionate put and call premiums may indicate market sentiment
towards a stock as you pay more to bet in one "favorable" direction.
However, try to go against the masses and blaze your own path, as the
majority (except for overall index performance) is often wrong.]{.mark}

[The "open interest" represents the number of open contracts at any
given strike price.Â²Â¹ As you near the spot price, open interest and
subsequent liquidity generally increase, but this volume still dwindles
compared to actual stock trading volume. Because of this, options
generally have much higher spreads than their underlying stock when you
try to exit a position before expiration by purchasing a contract to
cancel out your position (just as with closing futures contracts before
expiration).Â²Â¹ Look for high open interest to maximize liquidity,
especially as you trade options on lower-volume, volatile
stocks.]{.mark}

[With your broker and subsequent options exchange, you will trade
options using the following code pattern, similar to futures
contracts:]{.mark}

$Option\ symbol\  = \ base\ symbol\  + \ expiration\ month\ code\  + \ strike\ price\ code$[Â²Â¹]{.mark}

[where]{.mark}

$base\ symbol\  = \ asset\ representation\ up\ to\ three\ letters$[Â²Â¹]{.mark}

[where monthly call codes are:]{.mark}

  --------------- -------------- --------------- -------------- -------------- ---------------
  [Jan]{.mark}    [Feb]{.mark}   [Mar]{.mark}    [Apr]{.mark}   [May]{.mark}   [June]{.mark}

  [A]{.mark}      [B]{.mark}     [C]{.mark}      [D]{.mark}     [E]{.mark}     [F]{.mark}

  [July]{.mark}   [Aug]{.mark}   [Sept]{.mark}   [Oct]{.mark}   [Nov]{.mark}   [Dec]{.mark}

  [G]{.mark}      [H]{.mark}     [I]{.mark}      [J]{.mark}     [K]{.mark}     [L]{.mark}
  --------------- -------------- --------------- -------------- -------------- ---------------

[Â²Â¹]{.mark}

[and monthly put codes are:]{.mark}

  --------------- -------------- --------------- -------------- -------------- ---------------
  [Jan]{.mark}    [Feb]{.mark}   [Mar]{.mark}    [Apr]{.mark}   [May]{.mark}   [June]{.mark}

  [M]{.mark}      [N]{.mark}     [O]{.mark}      [P]{.mark}     [Q]{.mark}     [R]{.mark}

  [July]{.mark}   [Aug]{.mark}   [Sept]{.mark}   [Oct]{.mark}   [Nov]{.mark}   [Dec]{.mark}

  [S]{.mark}      [T]{.mark}     [U]{.mark}      [V]{.mark}     [W]{.mark}     [X]{.mark}
  --------------- -------------- --------------- -------------- -------------- ---------------

[wherein expiration occurs on the third Friday of the given
month.Â²Â¹]{.mark}

[Therefore, our Facebook, Inc. example contract order would look
like:]{.mark}

-   [FBX\[price\] (put) or]{.mark}

-   [FBL\[price\] (call)]{.mark}

[Monthly or yearly trading is the most common options time frame for
swing and long-term trades since this gives the underlying asset ample
time to reach the strike price.Â¹âµ There are shorter, more-active time
frames, but commonplace stock trades often offer more convenience over
daily or weekly options due to faster execution at exact prices (options
can only be bought or sold along standardized price intervals based on
the spot price of the underlying asset).Â¹âµ]{.mark}

[Price codes differ from security to security based on the asset's price
interval and how your broker routes the order. Look at your broker's
platform and see how they handle order entry and execution. Often, you
can simply enter a strike price to trade at along a secondary-market
spread.Â²â¶]{.mark}

[Since naming schemes and order entry can be confusing, many option
chains and brokers display simplified order metrics. For our Facebook,
Inc. example, Yahoo Finance simply displays a \$130-strike-price call
option expiring on January 25, 2019 as]{.mark}

[FB 19 01 25 C 00 130 000]{.mark}

[(spaces added).^20^ This naming makes it easier to analyze the current
market, streamlining your research to help you make better investment
decisions.]{.mark}

[Remember that option premium prices come from two factors: time value
and inherent value. The total premium cost to buy an option, also the
price you can sell your options at, combines these two as shown
below:]{.mark}

$Option\ value\ (premium\ price)\  = \ inherent\ value\  + \ time\ value$[Â¹â¹]{.mark}

[Inherent value comes from the difference between the strike price and
spot price. If an option is out-of-the-money, its inherent value is \$0,
and the entire premium cost is time value. If an option is in-the-money,
simply calculate its value compared to the spot price (e.g. one \$122
put contract for a \$120 stock is worth \$200 minus premium paid). The
remaining market value of the premium is the option's time value. Time
value decreases as an option nears expiration according to the following
graph, as there is less time for the stock to reach the strike
price.]{.mark}

![](media/image32.png){width="7.015178258967629in"
height="3.4854363517060367in"}

[Â¹â¸ Â²â¸]{.mark}

[So, option value decays as prices stay the same while nearing
expiration. Additionally, higher implied volatility increases relative
time value since a stock can deviate more towards a strike
price.Â²â¶]{.mark}

Your broker usually requires you to have a margin account to trade
options.â´ A margin account will also help you trade stocks more
efficiently by bypassing the clearing business days during which your
transactions settle and you cannot trade with cash proceeds. Once you
can trade puts and calls alone, you can use them to generate high
returns since each contract controls 100 shares. Any small price
movement multiplied by hundreds of shares brings high potential profits
with high risk since you lose the entire premium if your option expires
out-of-the-money. The only strategy with puts and calls alone is to use
technical analysis to predict where a stock price will move. With that
said, let's explore some complex option trades that lower risk or
generate cash flow with costlier setups.

In a strangle, you buy a call and put option with different strike
prices slightly away from the current price (out of the money).â· This
strategy makes money when there is a large move in the underlying stock
in either direction, as shown by the chart below.

![](media/image33.png){width="3.1070745844269467in"
height="2.3303062117235345in"}

**â¸**

In this case, you will only lose money if prices trail sideways until
expiration date as long as your strike prices are close to the spot
price. This trade also exposes you to profit from both sides of price
movement while paying only an option premium, a great strategy for
volatile stocks or perhaps more established companies with
highly-tensioned earnings reports.

In a straddle, you buy a put and a call at the same strike price very
close to the current price (at the money).[â¹]{.mark} This strategy costs
more to execute since options near the spot price tend to be more
expensive, but it also gives you a better profit guarantee as long as
the price moves in any direction enough to cover the premiums paid, as
shown in the chart below.

![](media/image34.png){width="3.0765168416447946in"
height="2.307387357830271in"}

[Â¹â°]{.mark}

If you are clueless about where an asset might go, say perhaps a
difficult-to-time market-tracking index fund, then strangles and
straddles can help you profit off underlying volatility with defined
risk (maximum loss is net premiums plus net commissions paid, which only
occurs when the spot price expires at the strike price).[Â¹â°]{.mark}

In an iron condor, you buy two options and sell two more in hopes that a
stock will remain stable. As long as the stock does not move to the
strike prices of the options you sell, you can leave your purchased
options unused and keep the premiums from the options you
sold.[Â¹Â¹]{.mark} If prices do pass an option you sell, the two you
bought will limit your downside. So, for a \$20 stock, you can:

-   Buy a put at \$10, (sets maximum loss if prices decrease)

-   Sell a put at \$15, (generates cash)

-   Sell a call at \$25, (generates cash) and

-   Buy a call at \$30. (sets maximum loss if prices increase)

> \*\*(all trades at same expiration date)

If a stock is especially volatile, you can sell your two options further
apart from the spot price at a cheaper premium to decrease the risk that
prices hit your strike price. However, try to keep the differences
between your two calls and two puts the same to minimize overall risk
and create the following potential profit chart:[Â¹Â¹]{.mark}

![](media/image35.png){width="3.1237073490813647in"
height="2.3427799650043744in"}

[Â¹Â²]{.mark}

To increase upside and risk, you can refrain from buying the put and
call as moderately-costly insurance policies. By only selling a put at A
and selling a call at B, you get the following profit chart:

![](media/image36.png){width="3.0in" height="2.34in"}

[Â²âµ]{.mark}

Since the standard iron condor requires four trades, try utilizing a
low-commission broker, as we will explore in Secret #37. Note that,
since your profit comes from the options you sell, you will usually have
to wait until expiration to keep the money you collect, and any
variation outside of your price range before the expiration date could
quickly create a loss.

In a butterfly spread, you also use four options to bet that prices will
remain stable. For example, in butterfly spread for a \$40 stock, you
can:

-   Buy an in-the-money call at \$30, (builds a capital base for the
    setup)

-   Sell two calls at \$40, (generate cash) and

-   Buy one call at \$50. (sets maximum loss if price
    increases)[Â¹Â³]{.mark}

> \*\*(all trades at same expiration date)

With this strategy, you will reach peak profitability when the options
sold expire at the price you sold them at, a price above the
in-the-money call you bought and can now sell (profit chart shown
below). Note that the in-the-money call you buy loses some of its value
over the trading period, say one month, since the value of an option
depends on how much time it has until expiration (given less time to
fluctuate above or below the execution price).

![](media/image37.png){width="3.1547047244094486in"
height="2.3660279965004376in"}

[Â¹â´]{.mark}

As with the rest of these multi-leg setups, your maximum loss comes from
the option premiums you pay. The low profitability area of this setup in
particular makes it risky but rewarding when you are confident about
future price action and balance the position well into your overall
portfolio through diversification, which we will explore in Secret #35.

Alternatively, you can sell a call and a put at strike price A to form
the following chart without downside protection if you are certain
prices will remain flat. These strategies work best when the option
chain shows low implied volatility, a measurement you can also find from
Bollinger Bands (which we will explore in Secret #32).

![](media/image38.png){width="3.0in" height="2.34in"}

[Â²â´]{.mark}

There are over fifty or so combinations of call and put option patterns
used by active traders.[Â²â· We have gone through the most unique
strategies that apply in specific options-only scenarios. Many other
strategies simply mimic positions that you can take with a simple stock
order. While options provide leveraged returns, actual stock trading
will keep your gains consistent and predictable in the end.]{.mark}
Nonetheless, consider options as part of your overall trading strategy
for swing trading and long-term investing.

##  Secure Your Financial Haven with Bonds by Mastering the Interest Rate Game

Before we get to technical analysis of stocks, let's finalize bonds.
Although they offer lower returns, bonds are terrific diversification
tools that secure your portfolio as you approach retirement or a savings
deadline, and they offer much better returns than cash equivalents. You
can use bonds to:

-   Grow your money with very little energy or management,

-   Protect yourself from passive losses in the stock market that you
    may not have enough time left to let go back up after an index
    downturn,

-   Guaranteed investment income levels rather than relying on changing
    stock dividends if you need spendable investment income, and

-   Supplement your portfolio as you first start investing in stocks to
    protect against a few failed trades.

To better understand bond uses, let's look at the return of \$100 in
1927 before the Wall Street Crash of 1929 invested in the S&P 500, a
virtually risk-free ten-year Treasury bond, and a mixed weighting of
both. As we talked about earlier, Treasury bonds are guaranteed by the
full force of the US government and buyable through TreasuryDirect.

![Image result for inflation vs bond market vs stock market volatility
historical graph comparison](media/image39.png){width="4.55in"
height="2.42in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

[From highest to lowest final return, we see the S&P 500, 50/50
Weighting, and 10yr Treasury.]{.mark}

Notice that your money in the first decade or two dropped as the overall
stock market fell. However, also remember that you can continue to
purchase shares as the market falls in monthly intervals as you
accumulate investable income, thereby decreasing your average order
fulfillment price and increasing long-term profits. This principle is
especially true for broad market indices that account for price
movements of many stocks.

So, why invest in bonds? Notice that the equally weighted Treasury-stock
portfolio lost significantly less cash in the early market pullback. If
you are planning to send your kid to college in the coming years, then
this pullback could be detrimental to their college fund, whereas a
portfolio with bonds retains most of the capital through the pullback.
Similarly, say that you were retiring in 1930. With a market crash, you
may not have 20 years to wait for the market to come back up. By
weighing your portfolio in bonds, you limit your downside and protect
your retirement money in its final stretch.

Now, in the long-term, the S&P 500 significantly outperformed the bond
and stock portfolio. When you have the luxury of time to invest, stick
with higher-yielding stock indices, and supplement your gains with
active trading to outperform the market when you find the time and
opportunities. S&P dividends alone often rival some bond portfolios.

Once you start investing in bonds, consider expiration dates, credit
ratings, and bond yields. Remember to follow diversification principles
just as with stocks so that one single loss in the bond market will not
greatly affect your overall portfolio (we talk about diversification in
Secret #35).

With traditional bonds, you lock your cash up with an entity for a
predetermined amount of time. Then, you get paid (usually) biannual
coupons that return a percentage of the money you lent the entity. This
happens over and over until you get to the expiration date specified in
the bond. At last, you can receive your last interest payment depending
on the time frame, and the borrowing entity returns your full initial
investment. This investment, no matter how long the bond lasted, will be
in the current dollars, so it will be affected by inflation just like
your regular coupon payments. You pay investment interest income tax on
your coupon payments, but pay no taxes when your initial investment is
finally returned.[Â²]{.mark}

An alternative, lesser-used type of bond is a "zero-coupon" bond. In
traditional bonds, you pay the "face value" of a bond, and you make your
money off the coupon payments since you are paid back the face value at
the expiration date. In a zero-coupon bond, you pay less than the face
value of a bond, essentially buying it at a discount.[Â³]{.mark} As you
near the expiration date of the bond, its value theoretically increases
since you receive a face-value payout at the end. However, zero-coupon
bonds pay no coupons, so you can get the same bond-like return from this
investment without actually receiving periodic payments. As for taxes,
you must pay interest income taxes on the theoretical annual increase of
the zero-coupon bond even though you received no cash from the borrowing
company.[Â³]{.mark} The amount you pay for a zero-coupon bond can be
found using:

$Price = maturity\ value \div$ (1 + *one-half annual yield*
)*^twice\ number\ of\ years\ until\ maturity^* â´

So, a \$1,000 zero-coupon bond that matures in three years and yields
ten percent annually will cost:

$\$ 1,000 \div (1 + .05)â¶ = \$ 746.22$ [â´]{.mark}

For this bond, you would pay investment interest income on the ten
percent yearly increase in the theoretical value of the bond. We will
talk more about why you might want to use zero-coupon bonds soon. Note
that corporate interest income (not dividend) is included in your gross
income and therefore taxed at your income tax bracket.[âµ]{.mark}

As of writing this book, the bond-market credit-rating system is fairly
centralized. The Big Three credit rating agencies, Standard & Poor's,
Moody's, and Fitch Group, collectively control around 95 percent of the
global credit-rating market. Because of this oligopoly-controlled
market, take credit ratings from these companies very seriously when
considering a bond.

The three corporations use the following rating systems, going from best
to worst corporate creditworthiness. Note that numbers and symbols are
also added to further classify bond ratings. Standard and Poor\'s and
Fitch use plus and minus signs (e.g. A+ is better than A or A-), and
Moody\'s uses numbers where Baa1 is the best Baa rating followed by Baa2
and Baa3.â¶

![](media/image40.png){width="4.75in" height="2.19in"}

[â¶]{.mark}

You can use credit ratings as one factor when you consider how likely a
lender is to default on you. Remember, bonds are simply debt instruments
wherein you lend money to a company that promises to pay you back your
initial capital plus interest. Corporate obligations to bondholders,
generally made twice a year, are paid before any cash is distributed to
shareholders. The only way you can lose money directly with a bond is
for the underlying company, organization, municipality, or government to
default on its debt and stop paying you (i.e. go bankrupt). Credit
ratings are a professional organization's opinion on how likely a
borrower is to go bankrupt on you.

Since most high-returning bonds are corporate bonds, we will focus on
these for creating bond income. This is not to say that you should avoid
municipal or government bonds. Jump at good opportunities to get a high
return in either of these bond categories if you are in the market for
bonds and the borrower is in good standing. However, most municipalities
and government offer lower returns because they often guarantee their
bonds with the full force of the underlying government. Corporate bonds,
on the other hand, carry greater yet still small default risk, therefore
offering higher returns in the form of bond yields.

According to the Big Three, investment-grade bonds are rated at least
BBB- or Baa3. Anything lower than these credit ratings are "junk bonds"
that will pay much more to borrow money from investors because they
carry higher default risk.â· Investment-grade bonds are more qualified to
borrow thanks to their ratings, but you should still perform basic
corporate financial analysis before lending to a company. Ask yourself:

-   Does this company have more assets than liabilities?

-   Does this company bring in enough cash to pay its debts?

    -   Look for companies the bring in four times their interest
        payments to be safe

    -   Any income under 2.5 times interest payments can be risky

-   Can the company sell assets to pay its debts in a business downturn?

-   How established is this company?

Simply put, make sure the company you lend to can pay you back with
interest. Try to find a good balance between highly-rated but
low-yielding companies and poorly-rated but higher-yielding ones. You
want to exceed average bond returns without taking on too much default
risk. Feel free to invest in a "junk bond" to get a higher return if you
find a company with great financial records or perhaps one you know of.
Just remember to keep your positions diversified in case of default (see
Secret #35).

Credit ratings and financials are both great, but you ultimately just
want to get the highest possible return without too much default risk.
If you are investing in bonds near the end of a stock-market cycle (as
shown through high chartable performances, abnormally positive public
stock expectations, and inverted yield curves), try to buy bonds in more
highly-rated companies, as a recession can bankrupt less-established
companies that can no longer service their debts by selling assets,
liquidating inventory, etc. (we will talk about inverted yield curves
soon). Likewise, you may be able to get away with a few very-high-return
bonds in a booming economy. Just remember that you are looking for bond
returns with bonds and specifically bond funds, which we will explore
soon alongside buying bonds at a discount in search of extraordinary
individualized gains.

Corporate bond yields depend on the risk associated with the underlying
company and macroeconomic factors. Since yields constantly change, your
locked-in rate could be great one month and poor the next depending on
the bond market.

This book was written in a low-interest-rate environment. In the many
years before this book such as the 1927 to 2000s example earlier,
federal Treasury bond interest rates peaked at fifteen percent while
inflation rates peaked between ten and twenty percent in many years due
to political and worldwide economic tensions.[â¸]{.mark} Values and rates
for all bonds depend directly on the federal Treasury interest rates
because the US government borrows so much money. Periodically check the
Treasury bond rates when you invest in bonds even if you are only
invested in higher-yielding corporate bonds or perhaps a corporate-bond
fund, as the Treasury's increasing or decreasing rates affect the entire
bond market. Additionally, higher rates can fuel a growing stock market,
emphasizing that you ought never completely leave the equities market
even when you approach a savings goal or retirement (see Secret #35).
Even in market crashes, corporate bond default rates increase as
companies fail. If you do not have time to wait for the market to
correct, bonds provide a cushion of promised income and priority
payments in any corporate liquidation.

With that said, try not to focus too much of your portfolio in bonds, if
any, before closing in on your retirement or a savings-goal deadline if
possible (unless you actively manage your bond positions, which we will
explore soon). You can outperform the bond market by keeping logical
positions in the market and not making rash selling decisions after
rapid downturns when you know that the underlying companies you invest
in are valuable. Additionally, bond rates tend to drastically increase
in crashes, making existing bonds less appealing to new bond investors
who can access higher lending rates. This "interest-rate risk" affects
all bonds as the rate corporations will pay for bonds slowly changes. To
mitigate this risk, let's run through a quick example.

Let's say you are 66 and you just retired! You know you will live a long
and prosperous life, so you decide to leave most of your assets in
stocks to appreciate and pay you dividends. As the market moves
extremely high one year, you decide to start taking gains and
rebalancing your portfolio into bonds. You do not want to take too much
money out of the outperforming stock market, but you want to protect
yourself in case of a downturn while also earning a modest return over
inflation. Say you put 20 percent of your portfolio in bonds. As you
grow older, you may spend part of your overall portfolio during
retirement and move into more, safer bonds. 30 percent one year. 37
another. Maybe you get to 45 as markets rally. The percent you allocate
into bonds depends on how you see the overall market. If you have made
significant gains, it might make sense for you to take a little money
off the table if you see limited upside in the coming years. Try to make
planned, logical decisions (hopefully based on technical analysis) about
when to sell some of your individual stock positions. For reference, it
took around three to five years for the S&P to recover from the 2008
housing bubble, seven years to recover from the dot-com bubble highs,
and two years to recover from the stock market crash of 1987.[â¹]{.mark}
However, much larger depressionary movements crippled the Dow for over
two decades in the crash and subsequent depression of 1929.Â¹â° Analyze
the general economic condition around you when approaching your
deadlines to determine how much of your portfolio should be in bonds. If
you are comfortable leaving cash in the market for the next decade, then
you might not even need bonds. By further using the technical analysis
skills in Part Two, you can reveal timely opportunities to avoid and
adapt to temporary market pullbacks. Everything comes down to your risk
tolerance.

Besides the basic percent return guaranteed by government bonds,
consider the Treasury's "yield curve" to analyze potential future
macroeconomic market movements. Here are the three yield curves you may
see. Since you primarily use bonds to protect your money as you near the
end of retirement savings or a savings goal rather than long-term
investments, you can usually just focus on shorter-term interest rates
to predict how they will affect your corporate bonds. However, as we
said earlier, these yield curves reflect overall market conditions and
can act as influential indicators in the stock market since they
represent the percent return the government guarantees depending on how
long you loan out your money.

![Image result for all yield curve
graphs](media/image41.png){width="4.75in" height="3.18in"}

[Â¹Â¹]{.mark}

In a normal yield curve, you get paid the most for locking your money up
with the Treasury for longer time periods and receive lower returns for
lower time periods. This yield curve represents economic stability and
shows positive future outlooks for rising interest rates. This is the
normal yield curve that investments in any bond should follow. Even with
higher expected future interest rates, the federal Treasury very
carefully adjusts its rates to find an equilibrium between supply and
demand during good economic times.

Treasury yields rarely stay at flat curves in which short-term and
long-term bond rates are about the same. Rather, this yield curve acts
be a precursor to a relatively swift movement to a normal yield curve or
an inverted yield curve.

In an inverted yield curve, short-term interest rates exceed long-term
rates, disproportionately rewarding less time-committed investments.
When this happens, investors think that long-term bond outlooks are
poor. These outlooks suggest that long-term bonds will continue to
decline in value because interest rates will decrease, to say the least.

Inverted yield curves have preceded almost every American
recession.[Â¹Â²]{.mark} They are one of the strongest indicators of
incoming economic troubles because of their consistent history of
foreshadowing market recessions. Perhaps one inverted yield curve in
two-year and ten-year Treasury bonds has been a false indicator in the
past half-century in the mid-1960s.[Â¹Â³]{.mark} Here are the most recent
stock-market recessions, all prefaced by inverted yield curves.

  ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- -----------------
  Date When the     Recession Start   Months from       S&P 500 Return
  Two-Year and      Date              Inversion to      from Inversion to
  Ten-Year US                         Recession         Recession
  Treasury Yield                                        
  Curve Inverts                                         

  August 18, 1978   February 2, 1980  17.7              9.9%

  September 12,     August 1, 1981    10.8              4.3%
  1980                                                  

  December 13, 1988 August 1, 1990    19.9              28.5%

  May 26, 1998      April 1, 2001     34.7              6.1%

  January 31, 2006  January 1, 2008   23.3              14.7%

                    Median:           19.9              9.9%

                    Average:          21.28             12.7%
  ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- -----------------

[Â¹Â³]{.mark}

So, watch out for inverted yield curves! After around twenty months from
the first sight of an inverted yield curve, the stock-market has
historically entered a recession. This gives you time to assess the
economic situation at hand and plan your asset movement into safer
investments. There are still high potential gains to realize in the
months before the market peak after you recognize an inverted yield
curve, as shown by the average 12.7 percent S&P 500 return from
inversion to recession. \[In 2020, we were net short after six months
past the inversion due in part to bearish macro indicators like
record-high employment, strong head-and-shoulders setups in specific
equities, and abnormally high gains in speculative companies like Tesla
and GameStop. Recall that cash tends to flow towards very speculative
assets prior a crash. Notwithstanding, we can see long periods of
exuberance per the dot-com era or the extended '21 Bitcoin run past a
heavy resistance at 40k.\]

The above data looks at the two-year and ten-year Treasury bonds. These
are great reference points when identifying yield curves, but you should
not worry too much about looking at specific yearly Treasury bond rates.
When you see an inverted yield, you will know it based on overall rate
trends. You can check Treasury rates in Yahoo Finance under the
"Markets" tab.

Note that this trend is a much less prominent indicator in foreign
government-bond markets.Â¹â´

As you know, bonds are simply companies taking loans directly from
investors. Bond certificates are traditionally much less liquid than
stocks.Â²Â² Stocks trade in both primary markets and secondary markets. In
the primary market, a company sells its shares in an Initial Public
Offering to directly raise cash based on current enterprise valuations.
Similarly, companies sell bonds to investors in the primary market to
raise credit.[Â¹âµ]{.mark}

In the secondary market, investors buy shares of a company from current
shareholders who sell the shares to other investors. Rather than the
underlying company getting paid, the previous shareholder liquidates
their position for cash.[Â¹âµ]{.mark} The secondary market for stocks is
where almost all trading takes place on exchanges, internally, via dark
pools, and more (as we discuss in Secret #37). Essentially, any company
that has any historical price data on Yahoo Finance has its shares
traded on the secondary market between investors and corporate
shareholders.

Because stocks historically create wealth much faster than bonds, demand
in secondary stock markets (e.g. the NYSE, LSE, NASDAQ) generates much
more trading volume for stocks. Secondary bond markets are therefore

a.  Less liquid (with higher spreads, as explored soon)

> and

b.  Greatly affected by federal interest rates.Â²Â²

As you know, liquidity is key for financial transactions. When you get
stuck in a trade, the market forces you to either wait for your limit
order to get filled on the ask as you anxiously watch the price move
back and forth or sell quickly to the bid and lose potential gains in
the bid-ask spread. This liquidity is especially important for bonds
because, unlike stocks which are listed on major exchanges, bonds are
only currently traded secondarily over the counter (OTC markets also
include cheap and otherwise uncredible companies which, from time to
time, create great nine-to-noon trades. We will talk more about
identifying these volatile, tradable stocks in Secret #36).Â¹â¶

If you want to sell a bond before its maturity date, you can sell it in
the secondary market to a new investor. Market interest rates affect the
bond's value over time in the secondary market. This creates
"interest-rate risk" when you look at the value of bonds sold before
their expiration date.

If federal interest rates rise, then the market value of your bond
decreases. If rates lower, the value of your bond increases. Let's look
at this in the market. Say you purchase a diversified portfolio of
five-year bonds yielding an average of 4.5 percent. In the current
market, Treasury bonds yield around three percent annually. Your
portfolio is doing very well in corporate bonds; the individual bonds
that make up your portfolio should be marketable around their purchase
price or slightly above it. As an individual bond investor, you can find
the best "value" or "growth" bonds just like in stocks by buying
individual bonds at discounts and selling them at premiums, as shown
below:

![](media/image42.png){width="4.75in" height="1.84in"}

Â²â´

\*Only including bonds with at least a 3.5 percent yield to maturity.
The yield to maturity is an annual percent coupon rate which represents
the total anticipated return of a bond if it is held until maturity
date.Â²â·

Since you can individually pick each bond you purchase, you can spend
time searching for and purchasing underpriced corporate bonds in the
secondary market which have increased yields due to interest-rate
changes or trading discounts (i.e. you can make much larger profits than
normally).Â²âµ Secondary-market bond values depend on public corporate
perception just like stock prices, so lower earnings and higher debt
obligations with declining growth prospects can cause bonds to trade at
discounts because investors fear defaults.Â²â¶ However, these temporary
discounts and premiums are only realized if you buy or sell a bond
before maturity from or to another bondholder.

If you hold a bond to maturity, you will receive its full nominal value
when your principal is returned in full per the bond expiration
agreement.Â²Â³ You can take advantage of secondary-market opportunities by
buying bonds from reputable companies with reasonable maturity dates
(that hopefully ladder into your overall portfolio) with both high
coupons and strong discounts. As you look at a bond's bid and ask,
provided by your broker's feed and created by market buyers and sellers
just like in equities, you can see a bond's discount or premium
represented as a number above or below 100 which simple represents the
price you will pay relative to a bond's face value.Â²â¶ If you purchase
individual bonds in search of consistent, high-yield returns, follow our
outlined long-term diversification principles in Secret #35. Watch for
companies that may have extremely large debt service requirements due to
large debt leverage, creating a higher default risk.Â²â¶

Now, let's say market interest rates fall to two percent for federal
bonds in a year. Your portfolio is worth more in the market this year
because borrowers now expect to pay on average one percent or so less to
borrow from investors because the market supports two-percent Treasury
bonds. Since lenders generally have access to lower-yielding bonds, you
can sell your bonds before expiration date in the secondary market for a
profit to realize your principal gain immediately (Sale price depends on
current market rates and bond length, as we will discuss soon. Just
remember "rates up, bonds down" and vice versa).â´Â²

However, you will also realize a bond's full secondary-market value if
you hold if to maturity.Â²â¹ Selling your bond early simply allows you to
capture gains immediately, whereas you will realize losses immediately
if market rates rise. These constant ups and downs in interest rates are
unrealized in the nominal value of your own bond portfolio, but they
cause bond funds to fluctuate. In fact, funds can lose market value
despite a lack of underlying bond bankruptcies because mutual-fund
managers are forced to sell open positions to pay for fundholder
redemptions (bond ETF management firms also distribute or acquire
creation-share blocks that terminate existing bonds and acquire new ones
before bond expiration dates) (see Secret #17). These early redemptions
change the net value of a fund's assets even through bonds are supposed
to be stabled fixed-income streams. To understand this principle, let's
look at the historic performance of three relatively conservative bond
funds that all invest in US Treasury bills.

![](media/image43.png){width="4.75in" height="1.9895833333333333in"}

Â³â°

From highest to lowest final percent return ignoring dividends, we see
the Loomis Sayles Core Plus Bond Fund, Vanguard Total Bond Market Index
Fund Investor Shares, and Fidelity Total Bond Fund.

Notice that all three of these funds constantly fluctuate and generally
trend sideways. If you buy a bond fund, your primary returns come from
dividend payments, an income stream unshown in direct stock charts. At
the time of writing, the three funds above pay out an average three
percent yield because federal Treasury interest rates are currently
around three percent.Â³â° To get this return with very little risk and
significantly less nominal volatility, you could simply buy Treasury
bonds. A similar mentality applies with investment-grade corporate
bonds, but you must diversify your portfolio with long-term holding
percentages (see Secret #35) because these positions carry default
risks.

Bond fund net assets fluctuate because they constantly close positions
before expiration in secondary markets, realizing nominal
interest-rate-value changes before expiration. Individual funds should
tell you how long they hold an average position for alongside their
average bond expiration length (check the management firm website).Â²â¸

Funds with mostly short-term bonds are less affected by interest rate
changes because their positions will quickly close, allowing the fund
managers to constantly reinvest capital into new bonds paying newfound
market rates.Â²â¸ If interest rates rise, then shorter-term bond funds
ought perform better than long-term funds because they can more readily
invest in higher market rates with increased capital liquidity.
Likewise, decreasing interest rates can cause these funds to decrease in
value, reflected by changing net asset values and market perception
(more deviance from NAV for bond mutual funds because of ETF share
redemption practices mentioned in Secret #17 which enable arbitrage to
maintain a stable and orderly market). However, if you hold any bond
fund for the long-term, you should worry more about your percent
dividend yield which reflects your overall bond return and investment
income.

Contrarily, interest rate changes more significantly affect longer-term
bond funds.Â²â¸ If the fund in question has a particularly long average
holding period or bond expiration lengths, then you could get stuck with
old market interest rates as new bonds are paid more for capital
lending. These funds can also lock in exceptional interest rates of the
past before new market rates drop to maintain strong long-term growth
and dividend payments. Consider the overall market interest-rate
environment you are investing in alongside available market funds to
find a blissful equilibrium in your bond fund portfolio.

Bond funds differ from personal bond portfolios because you can
temporarily lose nominal value because of interest-rate changes. The
following reference data may help your bond investing:

![C:\\Users\\jwooten\\Downloads\\Inflation, Treasury Yields, and
Coporate Bond Yields from 1953 to 2019
(1).png](media/image44.png){width="4.75in" height="2.8in"}

Â³Â¹ Â³Â² Â³Â³ Â³â´ Â³âµ Â³â¶ Â³â· Â³â¸ Â³â¹ â´â° â´Â¹

From highest to lowest final percent yield, we see Moody\'s Seasoned Baa
Corporate Bond Yield (20+ Year Expiration), Treasury High Quality Market
Corporate Bond Yields (20 Years), Moody\'s Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond
Yield (20+ Year Expiration), 20-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate,
and CPI-U Inflation Yearly Change. Expect shorter-term bonds to reflect
these trends but with lower percentage coupons. Notice that bonds with
higher default risk tend to pay higher yields.

We are in a historically low interest rate environment with a very
stable economy. As rates recently increased, bond funds often decreased
while individual investors simply reinvest their coupons at higher
market rates with no nominal decrease in portfolio value.

While you make incur temporary losses in bond funds because of interest
rate changes, your overall volatility will almost always be much less
than that of stock indices. Â²â¸ Stock indices may decrease fifty percent
whereas quality individual bonds never default and bond funds drop by
ten percent.Â³â°

In your bond portfolio, you can minimize all interest-rate nominal
volatility by researching your own positions and creating your own
diversified portfolio to outperform the market, just like with stocks.
However, bond funds do have some competitive advantages over individual
investors in current centralized bond markets. Aside from your
individual ability to buy bonds at discounts, as we discussed earlier,
bond funds have greater leverage with individual lending entities to
initiate new bond positions from the marketplace. To understand this
unique bond-fund position, let's explore spreads in generally illiquid
and higher-fee corporate-bond markets.

![](media/image45.png){width="4.25in" height="3.25in"}

Â²â¹

From highest to lowest final spread percentage, we see Micro (under
\$100,000), Odd-Lot (\$100,000 to \$1,000,000), Round-Lot (\$1,000,000
to \$5,000,000) and Block (above \$5,000,000) bond trade sizes
(volume-weighted spreads).Â²â¹

Because bond funds create diversified positions with millions or
billions of pooled investor dollars, they can access much lower spreads
in corporate markets than individuals diversifying with relatively
smaller portfolios can. These higher-quality spreads increase long-term
returns due to a lower cost basis at the cost of often-underrepresented
secondary-market bond discounts. Especially when considering the
additional task of finding and managing individual bond positions, bond
funds can streamline your investing as you near a savings or retirement
goal.

On top of this bulk order advantage, you can buy or sell bond funds at
any time in liquid ETFs and mutual funds.Â²Â³ Your capital is not locked
into any set bond expiration date, so you do not have to directly sell
any unexpired bond to another investor, potentially with a large spread
(the fund does this for all investors instead or simply exchanges ETF
shares).Â²â¹

Bond ETFs and mutual funds are an easier way to enter the bond market
with automatic diversification, lower research requirements, and minimal
transaction fees. Consider bond funds as you enter bond investing if you
value high capital liquidity and can withstand short-term losses with
long-term dividend payments.

Most bond investors are nearing retirement or a large savings goal since
their cash in not in the historically higher-yielding stock market.
Because of this, bond investors tend to have relatively large positions,
and changes in market interest rates can significantly affect the market
value of your portfolio. In fact, some record changes in federal
interest rates in basis points to track small movements in market rates.
One basis point is 1/100th of one percent or 0.01 percent
(0.0001).[Â¹â·]{.mark} These small measurement increments highlight how
much interest rates can affect the value of your bonds.

To mitigate interest-rate risk, you can "ladder" your bonds to give
yourself constantly investable capital. Rather than purchasing 20 bonds
that expire in seven years, you could gradually enter and exit your bond
positions. In this example, you could choose to purchase three one-year
bonds, three two-year bonds, three three-year bonds, five four-year
bonds, five five-year bonds, and one seven-year bond. With this
financial planning, you can reinvest your shorter-term bonds at market
interest rates once they expire. This will protect your investments and
keep them liquid without selling on secondary markets since your
positions will systematically reach expiration dates over time. When you
go to reinvest your cash after expiration, you can purchase bonds in the
market again. If interest rates raised over your holding period, then
you can take advantage of higher rates with new bonds that expire closer
to your target retirement or savings goal deadline. If interest rates
lowered during your holding period, you can reinvest coupon payments in
the short-term knowing that your older, longer-term bonds yield higher
average interest rates.

Laddering your bonds' expiration dates provides you with more capital
liquidity and gives you upside in rising interest-rate environments.
However, you may miss potential returns in a lowering interest-rate
environment. Consider the overall trend of federal interest rates when
considering how aggressively to ladder your bonds (long-term trends
shown two graphs ago. Now-rising shorter-term rates were recently near
zero percent as the government recovered from the 2008 financial
crisis).

Bonds are terrific investments to decrease your risk while still
providing tangible returns. However, liquidating a position before its
expiration date may yield a loss depending on market interest rates.
When you create a bond portfolio, just like with most stocks, ensure you
will not need the money you invest for any immediate expense or
emergency. The last thing you want to do is sell at an inopportune time
in the secondary-market for a loss. Bonds and bond funds in particular
often slightly boom when the stock market booms and slightly bust when
the stock market busts in terms of average default rates.â´Â³ Tough times
force lower-quality companies into bankruptcy and present unprecedented
buying opportunities as stocks go on sale. We will look more at
diversification in Secret #35, but always try to balance your stock and
bond-risk exposure as interest rates change.

Lastly, we get to callable bonds. If you are ready to invest in bonds,
this relatively niche term will help you identify and evade hidden "call
risks" in the bond market. I have greatly elaborated on callable bonds
on my YouTube channel in a concise video that will tell you everything
you need to watch out for to avoid potential losses when you face
bond-issuing companies. You can find this video by searching "John
Wooten: callable bonds" on YouTube.Â¹â¸ Â¹â¹ Â²â° Â²Â¹ You can use zero-coupon
bonds to alleviate callable-bond risk when a company refuses to remove a
call clause since these bonds have a guaranteed final value.

# Part Two: Technical Analysis

My experiences trading stocks, cryptocurrencies, forex, commodities, and
derivatives have shown me that these strategies, indicators, setups, and
more apply to almost any asset class.

##  Master Market Trends with Advanced Chartology

We looked at reading stock charts earlier; now, let's expand on the
gateway into technical analysis. Once you fluidly read and manipulate
stock charts, you will be ready to explore setups and indicators.

Now that you are familiar with dividends which show up in Yahoo Finance
charts as big "D"s, let's looks at stock splits which show up at the
bottom of charts as subtle "S"s.Â¹

A company may split its stock when it wants to lower its per-share price
for smaller investors, reward executives with more shares before new
financing rounds, etc.Â² The principle behind these splits is existing
shareholders' positions are multiplied by X shares per existing share,
and the stock price is divided by that same number X.Â² For instance, say
a company's stock trades at \$100 and you own ten shares of the company.
A two-to-one split would reward you with twenty shares of stock, and the
company's trading price would go to \$50. The number of shares you own
doubles, and the price of the stock halved.Â³ Stock splits like these and
reverse splits, which we will explore soon, affect all market
shareholders by changing the number of tradable shares available in the
underlying company.

When a company decides to split its stock, its board of directors picks
a split ratio. In a normal, forward stock split, a company divides its
stock price by the split ratio while simultaneously multiplying the
number of shares outstanding by the split ratio in shareholder accounts
(for more information, see stock registrars in Secret #37). All existing
shareholders have their position size multiplied by the split ratio
while the price of each share decreases by the same factor to maintain
the same overall value.

For example, in a two to one forward split, a \$100 stock turns into a
\$50 stock, and every share you own turns into 2.âµ The overall value of
the company does not change, and your position in the company is not
diluted since all outstanding shares are multiplied. Existing positions
are worth the same amount of cash, but stock splits, especially with
more expensive stocks, allow more investors to purchase a stock since
its price point is now much more accessible. Additionally, split stocks
are individually worth less, but more floating shares in the marketplace
increases liquidity.âµ This increased float will make it more difficult
for the stock to move quickly intraday. However, this effect can be
minimal when the initial float is already low.

In contrast, a reverse split increases the price of a stock by
decreasing the circulating supply of shares in a company.âµ For example,
let's say you own 100 shares of a stock that costs \$1. Suddenly, the
company issues a ten-to-one reverse split, and your 100 shares turn into
ten shares while the stock price multiplies from \$1 to \$10.Â³ You
should be especially skeptical when you see a company issue a reverse
split. While stock splits provide increased market liquidity by giving
investors more shares to buy and sell in the trading day, reverse splits
decrease the number of shares in a company and artificially increase its
stock price. This lowers the number of shares tradable intraday and
generally hurts liquidity and spreads.Â²

Generally, very cheap stocks, sometimes fractions of a penny, use
reverse splits to stay listed on exchanges that mandate minimum prices.â´
Additionally, many companies must perform reverse splits to increase
their price per share up to minimum quotas to stay listed on exchanges,
as most major US exchanges will delist stocks that consistently fall
below a minimum price.â¶ Some stocks use also reverse splits to falsely
make their stock look more valuable to investors.â·

In theory, stock splits and reverse stock splits do not change the
amount of principle in your current position. However, forward stock
splits generally indicate good company health in practice since they
show a company tailoring their stock to retail investors.â´
Alternatively, reverse splits do not technically change or destroy a
stock's market value, but they create poor public sentiments and
decrease liquidity in practice.âµ

If you are actively trading, you can watch out for recent splits and use
them to predict where a stock will move based on its price before the
split.â¸ Even for long-term investments, you can use recent splits to
consider the short-term value of an enterprise.

Yahoo Finance automatically adjusts stock charts and corresponding
prices to account for stock splits, saving your from calculating
historical prices to analyze a company before stock splits.â¹ However,
you should always notice splits as, especially in nine-to-noon trading,
they can cause immediate, rapid price variations in markets looking at a
newly-priced companies.

In the long-term, you can use stock charts to see how volatile a company
has acted historically. This volatility can help you understand the risk
of a new position rapidly moving up or down given its history of
consistency. Stocks with consistent growth trends may carry lower risks
than emerging stocks with much more volatility. For example, let's look
at Walmart Inc. from 1985 to today:

![](media/image46.png){width="4.75in" height="2.04in"}

Â¹â°

Walmart has gone through many stock splits to keep its price point low
for investors. Furthermore, we see consistent dividend payments
throughout Walmart\'s history. In Q4 2018, Walmart's Forward Dividend is
2.13 percent or \$2.08 for each share which is currently just under
\$97.Â¹Â¹ Moving past this solid dividend and stock split history, we see
that Walmart consistently went up in the long-term as the company grew
to expand both corporate profits and shareholder distributions. However,
notice that Walmart has gone through significantly extended sideways
movements, slightly bearish periods, subsequently large bull runs from
approximately 1993 to 2000 and 2004 to 2014, and fast price spikes and
drops in the past half-decade.Â¹â°

To decide if a company may be a good long-term investment, you can
assess its historical volatility and general historical-trend movements.
Generally, you want to see consistent growth that you expect to continue
for the next fifty years because of strong fundamental business
practices if you are investing in your retirement accounts. For the
extremely long-term, you essentially want to see anything but \$GE.

For reference, here is General Electric Company from 1985 to today:

![](media/image47.png){width="4.75in" height="2.04in"}

Â¹Â²

From 1985 to 2001, \$GE would have been a staggering investment that
turned \$2.50 into \$50 considering capital appreciation exclusively,
completely ignoring dividends which yielded almost twelve percent in
some years (19,000 percent gain overall, approximately a 20.6 percent
annual gain compounding for 16 years).Â¹Â² Â¹Â³ With this success, it is no
wonder the Company performed four forward splits during this time period
to keep their stock affordable for the average investor.Â¹Â² Yet, more
recently, \$GE has seen extreme boom and bust cycles, shedding
shareholder value and corporate market capitalization in rapid downturns
followed by calmer bull runs. Considering this, it is important to check
your long-term picks periodically to assess growth and potentially take
profits off the table.

With that said, General Electric is a dominant, established corporation
in many profitable industries with revenues exceeding \$120,000,000,000
in 2017.Â¹â´ Stocks like \$GE might lose some profits and stock value
during market downturns, but they still stand as potential buys to later
sell at new highs though swing trading. In general, try not to lose
money, sell when everyone else says to buy, and buy when everyone else
sells.Â¹âµ

Anyway, let's get back to Walmart Inc. Say discount grocery stores are
your favorite investment industry ever and you want to invest in Walmart
for the long run after seeing their strong historical performance. Great
news for you! Stocks like \$WMT are much easier to time than
overall-market macroeconomic-influenced index funds.Â¹â¶

The first step to analyze your entry point is to zoom in. You can
increase trading profits by primarily relying on short-term price
action, indicators, technical steps for nine-to-noon trading, order
entries, and order exits (we will explore indicators, setups, and more
throughout Part Two). For longer-term picks, it is great to establish
your interest in a stock based on long-term trends and company
fundamentals, but you can usually buy a stock for less or sell it for
more by looking at short-term patterns. If you spend the time to analyze
both these short-term movements and long-term setups, you can
consistently invest at opportune entry and exit points. For nine-to-noon
trading, these setups are the entire basis of profits.

Zooming into \$WMT's five-year chart, notice that the stock is in the
midst of a bull run:

![](media/image48.png){width="4.75in" height="2.43in"}

Â¹â°

We can also see a large red volume candle in the early 2018 pullback
from \$110 to the high \$80s. Such volume bars, like many of the other
indicators coming soon, are great indicators of price movement, however,
you should rarely base an entire position on one indicator. Instead, it
is ideal to combine the many strategies coming soon with corporate
fundamentals, personal insights, and market trends to find the best
picks available.

Since the market is currently more volatile than normal, as shown by the
CBOE^Â®^ Volatility Index (\^VIX^Â®^), we might expect a more rapid
short-term price movements in the overall market, including Walmart
Inc., a well-established thickly-traded corporation.Â¹â¹ The \^VIX
measures the thirty-day expected volatility of the S&P 500 Index by
using options and subsequent S&P 500 options contract technical changes
to produce a tradable index value.Â¹â· Â¹â¸ The index has accurately
measured historical S&P 500 market volatility, as shown below:

![](media/image49.png){width="4.75in" height="2.11in"}

Â¹â¹

From highest to lowest final return, we see the S&P 500 and \^VIX.

With little more to analyze in \$WMT, we can change our chart's weekly
candlesticks to daily candles:

![](media/image50.png){width="4.75in" height="2.43in"}

Â¹â°

This shorter data set demonstrates a somewhat inflated price emerging as
\$WMT trends upward. Without indicators or trendlines, we are "trading
blind" with this chart, only able to see a somewhat inflated jump up
after August and increasing selling volume in recent weeks.

We can keep zooming into this chart as much as we want to "analyze" it,
but, at a certain point, too much analysis and short-term bias can blind
you from macro movements. Looking too closely at a stock's short-term
movements can be counterproductive when you make a long-term trade with
a larger, established, thickly-traded, publicly-followed stock. These
stocks generally make meager percent-change movements compared to
nine-to-noon stocks because they have higher floats that prove tough to
move without large volume alongside well-established value levels. Float
represents the number of outstanding shares available for immediate
trading, ignoring insider shares, employee stock plans, and other
long-term ownership plans.Â²â° So, even though Walmart probably will not
double the number of stores they operate overnight, you can still take
advantage of such long-term growth in your retirement or overarching
savings plans.

Zooming into an hourly-candle chart for \$WMT, we see the following:

![](media/image51.png){width="4.75in" height="2.03in"}

Â¹â°

Looking at this, little new information or candlestick setups appear to
base new positions on, but there have been some good setups to analyze
such as a few small head-and-shoulders setups. In fact, this entire
weekly movement may unfold to be a head-and-shoulders setup soon. We
will talk about head-and-shoulders setups and other candlestick-based
setups in Secrets #29 and #30. We really need indicators to trade this
chart, and, without this information, we can only see a ton of bars on
top of price movements shown zoomed out earlier (we will explore such
indicators in Secrets #31 and #32).

The pink bars that Yahoo Finance shows represent extended-hours price
movements outside of 9:30 AM to 4:00 PM in New-York time.Â¹â° Yahoo
Finance does not have the most recent aftermarket data since it relies
partially on delayed data, but your broker-provided charting service
should have all possible up-to-date information.Â²Â¹ In a larger stock
like \$WMT, inter-day price movements are usually small unless huge news
surfaces (e.g. the August 16, 2018 third-quarter earnings report causing
the huge spike shown above after a 6.61 percent EPS surprise).Â¹â° Â²Â² In
nine-to-noon trading, these premarket movements are crucial to
identifying potential high-fliers, as we will discuss later.
Additionally, we will almost exclusively use extremely zoomed in
one-minute or five-minute candlesticks since active trading is much more
specific and analytical than holding a position for years. Always look
for opportunities to time a position and secure the best possible buy
and sell prices.

Going back to the August 16 movement in \$WMT, we see one of the stock's
largest single-day price changes in 2018. After this run-up, the stock
tumbled down slowly for months, so this movement proved to be an
overreaction to news. You can take advantage of this phenomenon in a
wide range of trading, as many people freak out in the market and allow
you to buy or sell at extreme prices which you can identify with
technical analysis. Participants buy based on news rather than
fundamentals and technicals, acting impulsively on emotions and extreme
announcements to create fast movements sometimes followed by
equally-speedy reversals. You can overcome these tendencies and improve
your trade consistency by buying undervalued stocks that you identify
with technical analysis. Underlying corporate assets change very slowly,
but public perception changes rapidly.

Take advantage of big downward movements in a corporation you deem
valuable and dare to buy when others sell as long as you understand why
others are selling and acknowledge the risk of a trade with a hard
stop-loss. Catalysts or institutional selloffs and buy-ins often trigger
big movements like these. If a company rockets much higher than you
think its worth, then you can take advantage of technical analysis tools
like Bollinger Bands in Secret #32 and your own principles to short an
overextended stock.

However, never base too much judgment on just one factor or indicator.
Rather, look for a beautiful synthesis of the coming technical
indicators along with catalysts such as market-moving news that you can
easily find in news feeds available when scrolling down on any stock
summary in Yahoo Finance. Most importantly, know when to admit that you
are wrong on a position and take seemingly unavoidable losses before
they compound and grow. It is also okay to miss a little upside by
getting in or out moments too early as long as you participate in the
overall movement you expect from a position. Technical indicators can
help you buy and sell close to possible highs and lows in your given
position time frame, but indicators like stochastics in Secret #32 can
also expose hesitancy and price uncertainty in stocks. Uncertain markets
are certain to take you down with them.

Quarterly reports (10-Qs) and annual reports (10-Ks) are much more
important when investing in Walmart or any other company for the
long-term. I would not dream of touching these sacred documents with a
nine-to-noon stock. Companies account for all their financials publicly
in these reports, allowing Yahoo Finance to create the amazing
"Financial" tab that consolidates the past four years of a company's
financial performance. You can analyze core metrics in these reports to
find one of the most important long-term-growth factors: money. To find
a full corporate report, look up any company's "investor relations"
webpage. Look for:

-   Revenue,

-   Income,

-   Gross profits,

-   Earnings,

-   Margin

-   Costs,

-   Debts,

-   Assets,

-   Liabilities, and more.

Here is how Yahoo Finance\'s stock tabs currently look. These tabs are
portals to long-term stock analysis alongside annual and quarterly
reports.

![](media/image52.png){width="4.75in" height="1.29in"}

Â²Â³

You usually want to see companies grow their revenues, margins, profits,
and assets over time while responsibly managing debts and other
liabilities. Additionally, make sure any income influx and gross profits
support a stock's market capitalization. To calculate the book value of
a company, you can use its balance sheet given under the "financials"
tab (simply subtract total liabilities from all assets and compare your
result to the market capitalization or divide the number by the total
shares outstanding for a per-share book value). Yahoo Finance makes book
price calculation even easier for you by using its financial data to
calculate a stock's book price under the "statistics" tab.

By using the "statistics" tab, we can see the following standout
statistics, among others:

-   Book value

    -   \$WMT's book value per share based on its most recent quarterly
        report is \$24.62.Â²â´ The Company currently trades at significant
        multiples of its book value, showing us that there is more to
        the value in Walmart Inc. than its accounting value according to
        the open market.

-   Float

    -   \$WMT has around 1.43 billion tradable shares, making it tough
        to very rapidly move the stock price.Â²â´ For nine-to-noon
        trading, prioritize stocks with low floats. A stock with a small
        float, say four million shares outstanding, will move
        significantly faster as investors compete to buy shares from
        limited sellers, especially after a market catalyst.Â²â° With
        nine-to-noon stocks, look for low floats to maximize potential
        returns, as the market can quickly buy up a stock's supply,
        driving its prices up quickly.

<!-- -->

-   Profit marginÂ²â´

    -   Higher is better, but not completely comparable between
        different companies. Some industries have innately lower and
        higher margins with different cash flows.

-   Dividend payout ratio

    -   If a stock pays a dividend, this statistic calculates the
        percent of all earnings paid to you and other shareholders in
        dividends. For newer companies, expect this number to be low
        since money is constantly reinvested to grow the business.Â²â¹ For
        well-established businesses, look for higher payout ratios that
        show a corporation returning its profits to shareholders. \$WMT
        has consistently increased its dividend yield for decades, and
        its current payout ratio is 117.71 percent.Â²â´ Without looking at
        the Company's accounting methods, we can assume that Walmart
        Inc. must either increase earnings to supplement this dividend,
        use cash reserves and retained earnings to pay shareholders, or
        decrease their dividend.

-   Percent of shares outstanding and float short

    -   The percent of all outstanding shares and float currently
        shorted for \$WMT is 1.35 and 0.66 percent, respectively.Â²â´ High
        short interest shows that many players in the market think a
        stock will go down, while low short interest reflects bullish
        sentiments. If a stock has a high percentage of its shares
        shorted, you may see many short shareholders either panic and
        buy back their shorted shares or exit their position because of
        automatic stop-losses in upward swings.Â²âµ "Short squeezes" are
        more common in nine-to-noon stocks with extremely larger percent
        increases which pressure short sellers to cover increasing
        losses early in the market, further causing prices to squeeze up
        (we will explore nine-to-noon stocks in Secret #36). Other
        times, brokers may automatically cover shorted client shares due
        to individual brokerage shorting rules and periods (check with
        your broker from Secret #37). The short ratio statistic (2.04
        for \$WMT) can also help you judge shorted shares.Â²â´ This
        represents the number of shares sold short divided by the
        average daily volume, showing the number of average trading days
        it would take for all short-sellers to cover their positions.Â²âµ
        Buy the rumors and sell the news for steady gains.

Beyond the accounting financials, annual reports specifically can give
you great insight into a company, especially if you know little about
their business. These reports, although sometimes long, generally walk
you through exactly what a company does to make money alongside how they
view their long-term presence in their market. They report on a
company's:

-   Competition,

-   Risk factors,

-   Founding principles,

-   Sustainability,

-   Investments/acquisitions and their performance,

-   Expansion plans,

-   Business operations,

-   Underlying business model,

-   Logistical backend,

-   Principle and subordinate businesses,

-   Reliance on consumer credit cycles,

-   Research and development plans, (i.e. improvements)

-   Number of employees/employee relations,

-   Executives and their compensation, and

-   Physical and intellectual property specifics (to learn about a
    potential advantage compared to other businesses in the same market,
    perhaps property that raises the barrier to entry for to-be
    competitors).

You may not need to read an annual report about companies you already
know a lot about, but these documents can significantly help you
understand a new, potentially higher-returning stock. To find these
annual reports, simply look up "\[company name\] annual report." The SEC
also keeps copies of 10-Ks in the public domain.Â²â¶ Try to read a
corporation's most recent annual report, as it will contain insights,
financials, and plans most pursuant to your investment timeframe.

To gain supreme insight into a company you invest in, consider attending
or listening to a shareholder meeting. These meetings show that a
company cares for its shareholders and, now that you are a shareholder,
lets you gain insight into future growth prospects.Â²â· These prospects
can reaffirm your position in a corporation and present new
opportunities to create shareholder value through business expansion and
overhead management.

Not all trades will look terrific. Thankfully, there are thousands of
listed stocks to look through in the US markets alone.Â²â¸ Let's continue
exploring technical analysis to learn how we can better analyze current
price trends. With these skills, you will surely profit more
consistently than trading blindly.

##  Top 3 Ways to Uncover Financial Insights by Marking up Your Charts

Yahoo Finance gives you the invaluable ability to draw on stock charts.
Using horizontal and diagonal lines, you can identify horizontal support
and resistance levels.

Support and resistance are psychological levels where buyers and sellers
meet in the market. Stocks tend to bounce off or break through these
price levels very quickly because investors recognize the significance
of support and resistance price levels.[Â¹]{.mark} Support and
resistances naturally occur in stock charts and can help you decrease
your trading risk by finding great buying and selling levels as
previously defined by the market. Here is a basic example to summarize
support and resistance levels:

![](media/image53.png){width="4.75in" height="2.88in"}

[âµ]{.mark}

The more times a stock touches a support or resistance level, the
stronger its perceived validity becomes.[Â¹ The quadruple-top resistance
showcased above is extremely strong, whereas the single support level at
the bottom is less established by this data. Big movements must occur
for a stock to break straight through a long-term resistance to turn it
into a support. Similarly, supports turn into resistances when stocks
tumble down below them. In the example above, the price stumbled when
first testing the historical support after its large downturn because
its old support acted as an initial resistance that the market broke
through, quickly jumping back up to the higher resistance level. You can
use support and resistance levels to predict where a stock's price will
reverse. To strengthen the security of a trade based on support and
resistance price levels, you can set a stop-loss reasonably outside of
the support or resistance range and limit your losses if a stock breaks
through a support that you purchase and keeps falling. Alternatively, if
a stock bounces off a support and rallies up to a strong resistance, you
can sell all or part of your position at the historically volatile price
level. The same is true for short positions based on high prices near
resistance levels.]{.mark}

First, let's look at a support and resistance example in long-term
trading. We will look at Micron Technology, Inc.'s long-term chart to
find any obvious psychological price levels. We can draw on this chart
by simply clicking "Draw" in Yahoo Finance's fullscreen chart.

![](media/image54.png){width="4.75in" height="1.95in"}

[Â²]{.mark}

You can identify the single historical price level marked above by
looking at prices \$MU consistently bounces off or has large market
volatility around. We see \$MU bounce off this \$37 price level in 1999,
trend around it scarcely in 2001, bounce off it in 2015, and quickly
break through it in 2017. Since the stock tends to bounce quickly off
this price level, it is a support level when the stock is trending above
it and a resistance level when the stock trends below it. In either
scenario, prices quickly move away from this psychological price which
has existed since the 1990s and will likely exist for decades to come
unless \$MU moves to a significantly higher price and trading range.

You can use support and resistance lines in any stock chart that covers
any duration. The key is to look for tops, bottoms, and price volatility
around specific price levels. Candlesticks help you find the best
support and resistance lines possible by revealing a period's high and
low prices. With this data, you can examine when a certain stock hit and
bounced off a support or resistance. Here is one more swing-trading
stock example with Nike, Inc.:

![](media/image55.png){width="4.75in" height="1.95in"}

[â¶]{.mark}

[We see three price levels that were constant swing points for \$NKE
because many buyers and sellers exchanged at these price levels. You can
profit in sideways markets by buying the lower support level and waiting
for prices to rise up to resistance levels. Notice that \$NKE broke
through both of its supports after a long consolidation at the end of
this period. Because the stock had the momentum to create a new high, it
soared as new buyers bought above the old resistance level. Try to
identify support and resistance in your charting that can significantly
influence price movements. Try to avoid over-analyzing a chart with too
many lines, but always connect consecutive bottoms, tops, or
consolidation phases that you think form obvious supports and
resistances.]{.mark}

Horizontal supports tend to be very enduring in both long-term and
nine-to-noon trades. Let\'s look at another example of support and
resistance in a nine-to-noon setup.

![](media/image56.png){width="4.75in" height="2.33in"}

[Â³]{.mark}

Slower, normal movements in \$TIK's price earlier in 2017 defined a
historical \$3.85 support and resistance level, and you can now use this
price level as a basis for active trading. For three of the days above
when \$TIK had a massive run-up in one trading morning, the price peaked
at or very near this resistance level. In recent trading days, this
stock has used the \$3.85 level as a support, now sitting at \$5.15
during the premarket (up 110 percent in the past two days).[â´]{.mark}
Daily candlesticks are useful in nine-to-noon trading because you can
chart out historical support and resistance levels before you enter a
trade so that you know what price levels will be difficult to break
through, helping you set your buy and sell targets in the morning. In
the most recent trading day, you could realize a near 30 percent gain by
shorting \$TIK after the stock broke through the VWAP by covering at the
\$3.85 support level (shown below). We will explore VWAP and finding
stocks that go from \$2.50 to \$6 in a day in Secrets \# 33 and #36.

![](media/image57.png){width="2.907442038495188in"
height="5.411458880139983in"}

[Â³]{.mark}

[Upper trendline is the intraday VWAP (coming in Secret #33).]{.mark}

Notice that this intra-day trade bottoms out at almost the exact
long-term horizontal support level we identified earlier. Because of the
history of this price level in \$TIK's past shown earlier, we can use
the strong, valid \$3.85 psychological price level as a profit target in
our volatile nine-to-noon trade after we short the VWAP
crossover.[â´]{.mark}

Horizontal support and resistance price levels are extremely important
psychological levels that dictate stock movement across all trading
intervals once established. Use them!

##  How to Navigate Markets Trends by Charting Your Treasure Map with Trendlines

Now that you understand supports and resistances, let's dive into
diagonal trendlines. In an upward trend, buyers are willing to pay more
for a stock while sellers stop selling for less. In a downward trend,
buyers are willing to pay less for a stock while sellers start selling
for less. These trends reflect immediate buying pressure and public
prospects for future growth in long-term positions.

With diagonal trendlines, you can analyze price movements and time your
order entries in all trading analysis periods by connecting subsequent
lows, highs, and consolidation phases. Let's look at an upward trendline
example with Shopify Inc.:

![](media/image58.png){width="4.75in" height="1.92in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

By connecting subsequent lows early on in this trend, we can use
trendlines to predict the best times to buy. \$SHOP's price hit our
quadruple-bottom trendline in October 2017 alongside large red volume
candles, screaming "buy." As time increases, the price continued to hit
the trendline for a little bit. Notice that the trendline lows increase
over time while the highs get higher and higher. The upper trendline in
this example can predict a good time to sell in the future, whereas the
supporting trendline is currently being tested. If a stock falls out of
a trend, adjust your trendlines accordingly.

Trendlines also appear in long-term setups just like support and
resistance levels. Here is an example with ABB Ltd:

![](media/image59.png){width="4.75in" height="2.19in"}

[Â²]{.mark}

Notice that in \$ABB and many other setups, the price may temporarily
fall below a supporting trendline or above a resisting trendline. Some
stocks bounce more quickly off trendlines because they have more market
attention and potential participants, whereas other companies like ABB
Ltd are considered more stable and may fall outside of trendline ranges
without necessarily breaking through them in the long-term, as shown in
the 2008 crash above. Be patient with your stock picks and allow ample
stop-loss room to account for temporary and slight price variations. I
have personally sold at the exact bottom of a movement right before a
rapid and extreme reversal due to a stop-loss.

Look for larger price movements, highs, lows, stabilization, reversals,
and other previous extreme price levels to find fast-price-movement
psychological levels. Learn your own risk-tolerance level over time with
trading and place your stop-losses at a protective but not restrictive
level. Try to use trendlines alongside support and resistance levels to
create predictable price points for profit-taking and stop-loss orders.
This practice will help you create consistently high profit/loss ratios
and avoid trades with poor profit/loss ratios (which we will further
explore in Secret #35).

Trendlines, just like any technical indicator, should rarely be taken
standalone when considering medium-term to long-term positions. Always
consider underlying corporate financials, market sector, and other
indicators which we will explore in Secrets #31 and #32 to get the best
view of a stock before you enter long-term or swing trades. Here is an
example of The J. M. Smucker Company breaking through their supportive
trendline:

![](media/image60.png){width="4.75in" height="1.94in"}

[Â³]{.mark}

Stocks may break out of long-term trendlines for many macroeconomic,
corporate, and sector-specific reasons. Realize that these trendlines
may be of use later, but they are currently invalid. Fun fact: Smucker's
owns, among other companies, JIF.â´

Trendlines help you identify market sentiment and often help supplement
moving average supports. They can create complex wedge setups and tell
you exactly where to buy a stock. Draw them!

##  Geometric Profits with Triangles and Wedges

Now that you understand supports, resistances, and trendlines, let's
look at complex trading setups you can create with these price levels
and trends.

Because supports, resistances, and trendlines create strong tension
levels in stocks, they can produce explosive growth opportunities when
they collide.

In a downward wedge, a downward trendline slopes into a supporting
trendline as the price stables.[Â³]{.mark} The stock fights to break out
of this upward resistance, and it usually should as long as the support
holds until the two trendlines collide at the very latest. In a
long-term setup, we see early \$MU again with a near eight-year
downward-wedge setup:

![](media/image61.png){width="4.75in" height="2.14in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

Long-term trendline setups can create exponential movements when the
underlying company gives good news or changes public opinion to increase
demand and purchasing of the stock. In this particular example, Micron
Technology, Inc. went from a conservative entry point of \$2 when it
broke out of this wedge to over \$45 in less than three years. [The
chart goes straight up.Â¹]{.mark}

The pressure point in the market during a downward wedge step is when a
stock tests its resistance. Most players connect subsequent highs and
lows instinctively to see psychological price levels, so trading volume
often intensifies around these trendline boundaries. In a swing-trading
setup, we see Apple Inc.:

![](media/image62.png){width="4.75in" height="1.8in"}

[Â²]{.mark}

The goal with this setup is to either buy near the collision of the two
trendlines (the end of the setup) off the supporting trendline to get
the best possible price or get in once the stock breaks the resistance
line and stays above it for a reasonable amount of time depending on
your time frame. In long-term investments, this could mean a week. In
nine-to-noon trading, it could mean two seconds. Where you enter and how
quickly you enter a position depends on your risk management and
personal trading style development. As long as you set respectable
stop-losses, you can limit your losses while your winners soar. The key
to getting triangle setups right is finding the right trendlines to use
for analysis. This skill simply comes with practice. Try to identify a
few trendlines in current stock price movements in some of your favorite
corporations' stocks and see how you do. With time, you will get the
hang of it. Then, you can progress to more aggressive order entry
points. This mindset holds true for most technical analysis.

Opposed to bullish downward wedges, bearish upward wedges form when a
supporting trendline runs up into a resistance. Stocks trend in the
wedge until they stumble along the lower resistance and eventually fall
out of the setup.â´ Let's look at a nine-to-noon example of upward wedges
on Adial Pharmaceuticals, Inc.:

![](media/image63.png){width="4.75in" height="2.65in"}

[âµ]{.mark}

Note that this chart shows two trading mornings.

In a normal trading morning, you could potentially make two or more
great trades off this chart. First, you could buy off the quickly rising
support around \$4.20 and sell at the stable resistance around \$4.80.
As you get more comfortable with trading, you will learn to quickly
identify supports and resistances to jump quickly into high-momentum
upward-swinging trades. The key is to outline your parameters in a trade
or identify the market sentiment early on. This particular stock had an
excessive premarket gain and worked in the first ten minutes of the day
to break its previous high of day. If you realized that, you may jump in
slowly in the first five minutes to take advantage of the first run-up
or perhaps the first pullback to beneath the VWAP (VWAP not shown. It is
around \$4.40, so you could predict the first supportive bottom based on
VWAP consolidation or even just buy the VWAP and sell the third peak. We
will talk more about VWAP in Secret #33 since it is such a powerful
indicator for nine-to-noon trading)[.âµ]{.mark}

[As for the downward wedge short, your entry point once again depends on
your risk tolerance. You could short \$ADIL immediately once it started
consolidating outside of its support, or you could wait for it to crash
through the VWAP (\$4.42) before sending in a short order.âµ]{.mark}
Nonetheless, the upward wedge holds true.

Let's look at one more example with a longer-term trade. Here we see an
upward wedge with Lumentum Holdings Inc.:

![](media/image64.png){width="4.75in" height="2.22in"}

[â¶]{.mark}

The goal with an upward wedge like \$LITE is to short at the upper
resistance towards the end of the wedge. This minimizes your risk since
you can stop out of the trade if it raises significantly enough to break
the wedge pattern while simultaneously minimizing your time exposed in a
trade. You can best determine entry points by looking once again at your
high-to-high trendlines and comparing them with low-to-low trendlines
while considering consolidation areas. Not all lines are perfect, as
shown by \$LITE's slight deviations from support and resistance levels,
but these lines serve as almost perfect uptrend, downtrend, and
eventually selloff indication levels.[â¶]{.mark} With shorter-term
setups, expect tighter trendlines and wedges that deviate outside of
trends slightly less because active trades are much less affected by
macro-market movements.

In upward and downward wedges, your price target is determined by the
wedge run-up before the breakout.[â· You can expect a wedge to reverse
the same amount as its initial height as shown in the following
charts:]{.mark}

![](media/image65.png){width="4.75in" height="2.51in"}

[â¹]{.mark}

![](media/image66.jpg){width="4.75in" height="2.5in"}

[â·]{.mark}

You can improve your order discipline and consistency by using
systematic profit targets and stop-loss levels.â¸ In combination with
support and resistance levels, your wedge setups targets can help you
find the best places to buy and sell while maintaining calculated risks
and strong risk-reward ratios.

Lastly, we get to the symmetrical triangle wherein two trendlines
converge at a single point with no definite direction. Here is an
example with Visa Inc.:

![](media/image67.png){width="4.75in" height="3.56in"}

[Â¹â° Â¹Â¹]{.mark}

The trick with symmetrical triangles that show little direction is to
wait for the initial breakout. After the price first breaks out of the
supportive or resistive trendline, the market will usually follow the
given trend. Reversals are rare because the previous support becomes a
new resistance or the previous resistance becomes a new support.
However, in the case of a false breakout and reversal, the reversed
movement generally reflects true market sentiment about the underlying
stock and will cause a strong movement towards the corrected direction
despite the initial breakout (aka. if the market changes its mind, it
generally stays with its new decision).â¸

As for your expected minimum price target, use the same logic in the
previous examples wherein you look at the range of the first run-up in
the trend range and add or subtract this amount from the breakout point.

Here is one more example of the symmetrical triangle pattern with
Ripple:

![](media/image68.png){width="4.75in" height="1.58in"}

[Â¹Â²]{.mark}

\$XRP's volume significantly increases at the breakout point, signifying
a psychological sentiment shift from the symmetrical pattern.Â¹Â² The goal
with symmetrical triangles is to get in once you see an undeniable
breakout direction towards the end of the triangle. As the market nears
the convergence point of the support and resistance, it must decide
which direction to move. Because this judgment move often occurs
quickly, you can prepare your limit order right at the edge of a
trendline or use a market order to get in a position rapidly. Use your
judgement based on the time frame (shorter time frame such as one-minute
candles will generally move much faster than daily candles) and bid-ask
spread to decide if a market order that risks a quality fill is
necessary.

##  How to Time Your Trades More Precisely with Standout Market Flags and Consolidation Patterns

As we have seen with trendlines, stocks consolidate around psychological
price points. However, the market tends to move rapidly away from these
price levels, creating great opportunities for you as an informed
investor.

Flags use consolidation and wedges on top of previous run-ups or
downtrends to predict future price continuation. Flags can act as great
indicators for your current position when you are already in a trade or
present a terrific buying or selling opportunity once a stock has
already moved a lot. You may see flags more predominantly in large
premarket gainers traded nine-to-noon (as we will discuss in Secret
#36).

Here is an example to summarize flags. You can easily identify these by
practicing your support and resistance-trendline drawing to get precise
flags and triangles every time.

![](media/image69.jpg){width="4.75in" height="2.9in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

Notice that the run-up period for this setup starts at the previous low
of the flagpole movement. Try to enter a flag position after a strong
support (or resistance if shorting) level is established. Note that the
flag itself may look like a wedge in some trades.[Â¹ The important thing
to identify with these setups is not necessarily the support and
resistance shape in the middle but rather the fact that there is
consolidation in a movement that already has significant growth (or
decline if shorting).]{.mark} You can see the same pattern with a
downward-trending flag, wedge, etc. Once you identify the support and
resistance in the middle of a movement, you can find the height of the
flagpole. Enter your order and calculate your profit target when you see
upward price momentum breaking through the flag's resistance (or support
if shorting).

Here are two more flag examples in INTL FCStone Inc.:

![Bull Flag Chart](media/image70.gif){width="4.491292650918635in"
height="6.104166666666667in"}

[Â²]{.mark}

[This example is a shorter-term, active chart but not necessarily a
nine-to-noon stock. You will see much more implicit volatility and
percent changes in the stocks we will screen for]{.mark} in Secret #36[,
realizing greater returns using flag patterns. This is especially true
for opening-bell movements wherein orders pour in to purchase or sell a
stock with significant premarket catalysts and volume.]{.mark}

![Bear Flag Charts](media/image71.gif){width="4.75in" height="5.32in"}

[Â²]{.mark}

Here, we see a swing-trading setup that requires you to hold your
position post-market. Remember that post-market holding can pose
significant volatility risks in nine-to-noon stocks. These positions, as
shown above, can make large premarket movements in unpredictable
directions, especially after a large daily run-up or downtrend.

With that said, this flag pattern held true through the post-market.
Stick with strong support and resistance levels and your trades will
surely turn out well with consistency.

##  How to Unearth Profits with the Hidden Formula in ABCD Patterns

The ABCD setup is the mother of all technical setups. This pattern
provides you with:

-   Low downside risks,

-   Clear price entry zones,

-   Easily-calculated profit targets, and

-   Very high potential returns.

You will see this setup especially in very-early-morning nine-to-noon
trading with stocks that have large premarket upward movements or simply
big run-ups early in the morning from catalysts.

The rough graph below shows the basics behind the ABCD setup:

![](media/image72.png){width="4.748611111111111in"
height="2.1979166666666665in"}

[Â¹ Â²]{.mark}

Notice the large initial price run-up. This forms the "A" in the setup.
For active trading, this large initial percent gain will get this stock
on everyone's screeners since it blazes an early-morning gain (which we
will further explore in Secret #36). This movement brings more attention
and buyers to a stock.

Following this new high, we see a slight pullback and consolidation.
This pullback should not generally exceed half of the initial run-up
high in an optimal setup. However, extended setups with daily, weekly,
or monthly candlestick periods may fall below this price level before
later returning to complete an extended ABCD setup. This pullback
finalizes the "A" and forms the "B" in the setup once it finds market
support.

![](media/image73.png){width="2.25in" height="2.5541666666666667in"}

[Â¹ Â²]{.mark}

Next, the setup starts curving up as more investors buy the stock. This
slight curve forms the crucial "C" in the setup and shows that there is
still interest in the stock (shown below). This interest keeps the stock
afloat rather than the movement simply being a wash uptrend and
subsequent reversal. If you want an aggressive order entry on the ABCD
setup, try to enter your order towards the end of the "C" before the
stock gets too high again but after it finds stability and guarantees a
slight upward curve.

![](media/image74.png){width="4.74836176727909in"
height="2.3270833333333334in"}

[Â¹ Â²]{.mark}

It can be difficult to ensure initial upward price movement towards a
new high before entering an order. For easier, more consistent trades,
you can only enter in once the "C" ends and the stock overtakes its
previous high to start an uptrend into the final "D." This upward price
movement is exactly why you trade this setup to find consistent ABCD
gains.

![](media/image75.png){width="4.75in" height="2.29in"}

[Â¹ Â²]{.mark}

To find your price target for the "D" movement, add the height of the
"A" run-up to the previous high formed by the "A." This minimum price
target works in almost all ABCD setups to consistently close at least
part of your order at the highest price possible. You will learn to get
the best fill price for your order when it exceeds the ABCD target
significantly through experience watching stocks' momentum and volume
patterns. Remember, more volume brings more buyers, liquidity, and
shares taken out of the stock's float.

![](media/image76.png){width="4.75in" height="2.3in"}

[Â¹ Â²]{.mark}

The ABCD setup is a huge nine-to-noon setup, but you can also apply its
principles to longer-term investing. Aside from long-term ABCD setups,
remember the significance of a stock breaking its previous high. New
highs bring new attention to a stock, attracting more buyers that push
prices even higher. Watch for stocks breaking into new highs as they may
be temporarily overbought or oversold. We will look at stochastics in
Secret #32 to better understand these levels.

The ABCD pattern also helps you understand risk management. Notice that
the ABCD price target is twice as high as the downside when you enter at
an aggressive entry point. By risking only half of your potential
rewards, you can take more trades and earn more because you limit your
losses more than your wins. Always try to find a trading balance in
which the market rewards your risk well with potential profits.

Here is a morning-trade ABCD setup using one-minute candles on Cronos
Group Inc.:

![](media/image77.png){width="4.75in" height="1.54in"}

[Â³]{.mark}

Notice that the "B" and "C" in \$CRON slightly blend together during the
stock's fifteen-minute consolidation. Worry not. You will do great with
ABCD setups as long as you get in around the resistance and set your
stop-loss in case of an unforeseen reversal. Still, give yourself enough
room for the trade to work. \$CRON had a slight but rapid one-minute
pullback before quickly rising back up from just over \$10 to just under
\$12.Â³

A slight variation of the ABCD setup is the cup-and-handle setup. With a
cup and handle, you will see the same initial setups as an ABCD chart
until the end of the "C." Here, there is a slight downward retrace at
the end of the "C" before a final move upward into the "D." Here is an
example of the cup-and-handle setup:

![Image result for cup and handle
setup](media/image78.gif){width="4.75in" height="4.02in"}

â´

Remember this setup in case a stock seems to reverse from an ABCD setup
and carefully adjust your stop-loss in case prices are simply forming a
handle and will eventually break the resistance and jump to new highs.

##  How to Anticipate Newsworthy Moves with the Head-and-Shoulders Enigma

The head-and-shoulders setup is a very specific and predictably strong
support-and-resistance setup. The pattern indicates a reversal in price
action and a potential bottom in trading prices when accompanied by
large red volume candles. This setup presents terrific opportunities for
shorting and buying new positions while also indicating a good time to
exit current positions. Here is the general pattern:

![](media/image79.png){width="4.75in" height="2.04in"}

[Â¹ Â²]{.mark}

During the initial run-up, the stock forms the first shoulder before
pulling back to a resistance line. Then, the stock shoots back up to
form a new high and the head in the pattern. Afterwards, prices fall to
the support line from the first shoulder and start to trace back up.
This is the first moment when the head-and-shoulders pattern starts
taking shape, as you can see by the underlying support alongside the
first shoulder and the head. At this point, you want to see the stock
bounce off the resistance created by the first shoulder as shown below:

![](media/image80.png){width="3.75in" height="2.56in"}

[Â¹ Â²]{.mark}

If you were long in this position when the head-and-shoulders pattern
started, then you may sell part of your position at this point. The
second shoulder is often the highest price the stock will hit before it
reverses off the large first-shoulder resistance level and goes
downwards to break below the support.

This setup occurs throughout all time frames and usually ends where it
started. At a minimum, expect the stock to move the height of the head
over the neckline support level subtracted from said support level, as
shown in the following diagram.Â¹ In a normal set up like this, you can
expect the price to drop to the low before the start of the setup.

![](media/image81.png){width="4.75in" height="2.36in"}

[Â¹ Â²]{.mark}

Alternatively, the inverted-head-and-shoulders setup flips the
head-and-shoulders setup to indicate upward price movement, as shown
here:

![](media/image82.png){width="3.75in" height="2.61in"}

[Â¹ Â²]{.mark}

[The shoulders now create support levels while the neckline acts as
resistance for an upward movement. The pattern is solidified by the
first shoulder, head, and second retrace back to the initial support
level. Similar to the head-and-shoulders setup, we see the following
entry points and minimum profit targets in inverted-head-and-shoulders
setups. We can also set a profit target where the stock initially sat
before falling into the inverse setup.]{.mark}

![](media/image83.png){width="4.75in" height="2.37in"}

[Â¹ Â²]{.mark}

[With this strong technical setup, the underlying company you trade does
not matter very much. Your price analysis and disciplined support and
resistance levels will yield you great profits rather than an
understanding of the underlying business or corporate
performance.]{.mark}

##  Unlock Market Trends with Candlestick Magic

Extreme candlesticks serve as terrific reversal indicators when they
form a "hammer." Hammers can help you find bottoms and tops in
short-term movements. You will see these candlesticks when a stock drops
to test new lows but quickly recovers before a candle closes, leaving a
large lower wick and small candle body.Â¹ Meanwhile, the top wick in a
hammer setup is very small or completely engulfed in the candlestick, as
shown below:

![](media/image84.gif){width="3.0in" height="2.68in"}

Â¹

Left candle is green and right is red. See Secret #11.

Hammer candles indicate strong reversal potential in markets because of
rapid buying and selling at significant psychological price levels.
Especially in trending movements, these candles can work off and
strengthen support and resistance levels to indicate an impending
reverse price movement. By mastering hammer candles and the other
candlestick setups coming soon, you can identify great trading
opportunities once validated by the market.Â²

The color of a hammer candle matters little in practice, although green
attracts more buyers. You can confirm a hammer reversal once the
following candle closes above the hammer candle.[â´]{.mark}

Below you can see the reversal power of a hammer candle after a
continued downturn:

![](media/image85.png){width="4.75in" height="2.8in"}

[Â³]{.mark}

Notice the market overtakes the hammer candle once it reverses, proving
the hammer setup quickly. The downside on a long trade here should be
the bottom of the hammer candle. You can limit your risk by waiting for
the next few candles to prove the hammer setup.

In the large initial run-up, we also see an upside down hammer candle
swiftly reverse this stock (small body with a large top wick and small
bottom wick). You can verify the validity of these slightly less
consistent "inverted hammers" by watching the following candle for an
immediately shortable downtrend. Here, extreme buying pressure quickly
enters the market, pushing it to newfound highs. However, the inverted
hammer candle closes much lower than its highs, reflecting a shift in
overall market sentiment as other investors take profits.

Besides looking at the following candle, you can verify hammer setups
with other indicators like stochastics and VWAP, searching for oversold
warnings (we will talk about these indicators and more in Secrets #32
and #33).

Lastly, watch out for miscellaneous candlestick setups. Although you may
not see these particularly often, they can help confirm or deny your
sentiment towards a stock's movement. If you are constantly having
trouble finding candlestick setups like these, do not worry. Often, you
can simply judge a stock with price-based indicators, volume, and
overall feel based on market conditions such as level 2 and float. Watch
out for these additional patterns as an element in your technical
analysis strategies:

![](media/image86.png){width="4.75in" height="2.23in"}

[âµ]{.mark}

![](media/image87.png){width="4.75in" height="2.31in"}

[âµ]{.mark}

##  Harmonic Convergence in Moving Averages and MACD -- Your Secret to Trend Timing

Moving averages appear on your charts as smoothed lines averaging
historical prices. These lines act as natural key historical support and
resistance levels, and their strengths depending on the underlying time
period measured.Â¹ To calculate a simple moving average, use the formula:

$$\frac{Sum\ of\ all\ closing\ prices\ for\ the\ previous\ time\ intervals}{Number\ of\ time\ periods\ averaged}$$

Therefore, for a cheap stock's five-day moving average, you could find
the current average by calculating:

$\frac{12 + 13 + 12.5 + 11 + 13.5\ (closing\ prices)}{5\ (days)} = \$ 12.40$
[Â¹]{.mark}

The periods measured by a moving average depend on your charts. If you
use daily candles, then the moving average is calculated with the last
five days (in this example), whereas hourly candles calculate the
five-hour moving average.Â¹

Moving averages are moving because they drop the last data point from a
series and add a new one once available. Therefore, to continue our
example, we drop the oldest \$12 price from the five-period moving
average and replace it with the next period's price.Â¹

The three most-used averages are the 50, 100, and 200 moving averages.[Â²
Since these are popular, many other investors will look at these price
levels and consider them as support and resistance levels just like you.
Because these levels are mostly psychological, these averages serve as
support and resistance levels throughout all time frames. With that
said, longer measurement intervals produce stronger moving
averages.Â²]{.mark}

[Here is a weekly-candlestick chart of Tesla, Inc. with all three major
moving averages:]{.mark}

![](media/image88.png){width="4.75in" height="2.11in"}

[Â³]{.mark}

[From highest to lowest price at the beginning of 2018, we see the 50
Moving Average, 100 Moving Average, and 200 Moving Average.]{.mark}

[]{.mark}

[The most volatile moving average (MA) is the 50 MA, the intermediate
moving average is the 100 MA, and the stable lower moving average is the
200 MA. All of these averages use weekly values. We can make our moving
averages less volatile with monthly candlesticks, or we can use daily or
hourly candlesticks to make our graph more volatile.Â³ Depending on the
underlying stock, different time periods may make more sense. You can
find past periods to analyze by searching for moving averages that act
as valid support and resistance levels.]{.mark}

[In \$TSLA, we see that the weekly 200 MA in particular historically
acts as a very strong support level. The stock tested this
moving-average-support level four times in early 2016, late 2016, early
2018, and late 2018. However, the market brought extreme buying power to
the stock at these averages, quickly reversing price movement. These
averages can often be a great place to enter an order because you can
expect the stock to move quickly away from the historically-strong
moving-average level.Â² In case the stock breaks through the MA into a
downtrend, you can set your stop-loss at a reasonable distance below or
above the moving average (if shorting).]{.mark}

[Add 50, 100, and 200 moving averages to all your charts to analyze
unseen support and resistance levels. Here is one more example with eBay
Inc.:]{.mark}

![](media/image89.png){width="4.75in" height="2.03in"}

[â´]{.mark}

[From highest to lowest final price, we see the 50 Simple Moving
Average, 100 Simple Moving Average, and 200 Simple Moving
Average.]{.mark}

In recent bullish years, \$EBAY consistently bounced off its 50-week,
100-week, and 200-week moving averages to continue upwards (highest to
lowest average lines, respectively).â´ The current price below the
200-week MA suggests bearish sentiment as the stock enters a seemingly
flag-shaped pattern with newfound lows past the supposedly supportive
200 monthly moving average.

However, as we look towards \$EBAY's pre-2008-crash price action, we see
a significant moving average indicator: the death cross. Death crosses
occur when a short-term moving average (say the 50-period) crosses a
long-term moving average (200-period).[Â² âµ]{.mark}

[Death crosses indicate a significant shift in market sentiment. Crosses
in longer-term moving averages such as weekly or monthly moving averages
are significantly stronger than shorter-period MAs.âµ Weekly moving
average death crosses forerun almost every major market crash in the S&P
500.â¶ These long-term moving averages can predict a stock's price
reversal for years, whereas shorter daily or hourly MA death crosses can
predict temporary price movement.]{.mark}

[Alongside death crosses which suggest lower future prices, a golden
cross forecasts higher future prices. This cross happens when a
50-period moving average rises above the 200-period average.â· After
\$EBAY's 2007 death cross and subsequent downtrend, the stock began a
recovery run-up and performed a golden cross in 2011.â´ After this cross,
the stock continued an upward rally. Often, upward trends indicated by a
golden cross can last much longer than downward trends indicated by a
death cross.]{.mark}

[Simple moving averages form great setups on your charts. Some
alterations of moving averages are weighted moving averages, exponential
moving averages, and m]{.mark}oving average envelopes.

Weighted moving averages give more weight to recent prices. In our
five-day MA from before, we could use the following calculation:

$12 \bullet (1 \div 15) + 13 \bullet (2 \div 15) + 12.5 \bullet (3 \div 15) + 11 \bullet (4 \div 15) + 13.5 \bullet (5 \div 15)\  = \ \$ 12.47$
[â¸]{.mark}

Weightings can differ depending on how much you want to emphasize recent
price trends. You can use any weighting metric you want as long as all
made-up price percentages add up to 100 percent. In our example, the
most recent price is five times more influential to the moving average
than the first closing price in the five-day average. This is a normal
price weighting since each time period closer to the current price is
weighed one increment more than the last.[Â¹Â¹]{.mark} Similar to simple
moving averages, a new time period's price will enter this calculation
as the most-weighted factor while the last price in the old average is
forced out of the calculation as all other prices move back one
weighting spot.[â¸]{.mark}

Exponential moving averages (EMA) uniquely use previous exponential
moving averages rather than prices to calculate new averages. To find an
exponential moving average, use the formula:

$$Current\ EMA = (Constant \bullet Current\ Price) + (1 - Constant) \bullet (Previous\ Period\ EMA)$$

where

$$Constant = \frac{2}{number\ of\ time\ periods\ averaged\  + \ 1}$$

and

$Previous\ Period\ EMA = Simple\ Moving\ Average\ for\ initial\ EMA\ calculation\ only$
[Â¹Â¹]{.mark}

Therefore, in our five-day average from before, the EMA would be:

$(\frac{2}{5 + 1} \bullet 13.5) + (1 - \frac{2}{5 + 1}) \bullet (\frac{12 + 13 + 12.5 + 11 + 13.5}{5}) = \$ 12.77$
[Â¹Â¹]{.mark}

To recap, our simple moving average is \$12.40, our weighted moving
average is \$12.47, and our exponential moving average is \$12.77.

Both weighted and exponential moving averages follow stock trends
slightly faster than simple moving averages. You may find these averages
more helpful in short-term scenarios where you want to quickly follow
the underlying momentum, support, and resistance in a movement. However,
shorter-term simple moving averages also accomplish this goal, often
with more consistency.â¹ Experiment with what works best for you, and
understand that you are often thinking too hard when you focus on fine
details.

Here is a long-term example with Cimarex Energy Co. using simple,
weighted, and exponential 200 moving averages. To enter these in Yahoo
Finance, simply add a moving average and click on "simple" to change to
weighted or exponential.

![](media/image90.png){width="4.75in" height="2.05in"}

[Â¹â°]{.mark}

[From highest to lowest final price, we see the 200 Weighted Moving
Average, 200 Simple Moving Average, and 200 Exponential Moving
Average.]{.mark}

Here, the weighted and exponential weekly moving averages closely follow
the simple moving averages. For support and resistance levels alongside
price-average crosses, these averages function similar to simple moving
averages. However, weighed and exponential moving averages are generally
used less because of their increased complexity compared to simple
moving averages. This is shown specifically in this graph of \$XEC in
late 2011 to 2013 when the stock initially bottomed under the weighted
and exponential 200 MAs at the simple 200 MA.[Â¹â°]{.mark} The stock later
found resistance and broke away from its lows when it crossed back over
the simple moving average.[Â¹â°]{.mark}

[As more people use simple moving averages, the perceived significance
of the calculated psychological price level increases.]{.mark}
Nonetheless, all three of these moving averages help you identify
trends. Simply use one to three simple moving averages on your charts,
and they will help you identify long-term and swing trends through
lagged average prices. Stick with 50, 100, and 200 simple moving
averages to find the best natural support lines, resistance levels, and
moving-average crossovers in stocks and more. Trend is your friend, and
moving averages help you identify and profit from price-average
crossovers, moving-average crossovers, and large potential moving
average deviations.[â¹]{.mark}

Yahoo Finance also allows you to add a moving average envelope to your
charts. By default, Yahoo Finance bases this envelope on the 50 moving
average, but you can change this to any period.â¶ Yahoo also
systematically sets the moving average envelope charts with a plus or
minus five percent range.â¶ Even though you can change the percent values
for the range, this envelope proves less predictive of support and
resistance levels in practice. Rather, look at basic moving averages
alongside Bollinger Bands to measure how far a price deviates from
averages (we will look at Bollinger Bands in Secret #32). This indicator
is better because it dynamically adjusts for price volatility rather
than applying a static percent deviation to a moving average.Â²

As for nine-to-noon trading, you will primarily use long-term moving
averages to identify potential intraday support and resistance levels.
Alongside VWAP, which we will discuss in Secret #33, you can also use
shorter twenty-period or nine-period moving averages to predict intraday
support and resistance levels with short-term candlesticks. These
short-term moving averages work especially well when identifying support
and resistance levels in one or five-minute candlesticks.[Â¹â¸ Combine
these moving averages with longer-term support and resistances from 200,
100, and 50 daily, weekly, and monthly levels to improve nine-to-noon
trading consistency.]{.mark}

Moving on from moving averages, we discover the Moving Average
Convergence Divergence (MACD) and Moving Average Deviation indicators.

The Moving Average Deviation simply tracks the standard deviation of a
stock's prices away from any given moving average.[Â¹Â²]{.mark} The
most-used and default moving average for MA Deviation in Yahoo Finance
is a twelve-period average.[â¶ You can use the MA Deviation like the MACD
to track volatility, trends, and potential reversals. Here is Apple Inc.
with both MA]{.mark} Deviation [and the MACD:]{.mark}

![](media/image91.png){width="4.75in" height="2.03in"}

[Â¹Â³]{.mark}

\$AAPL moves up as the moving average deviation simultaneously rallies
before eventually crashing back down when \$AAPL pulls back.[Â¹Â³]{.mark}
You can time these movements by looking for the MA Deviation to
crossover the positive-negative average midpoint to find great buying
and selling opportunities at optimum prices. As you increase your time
period, these movements become more significant. Note that MA Deviation
is almost the exact same as the underlying bars in the MACD indicator.

The Moving Average Convergence Divergence measures momentum oscillation
through a MACD Line, Signal Line, and MACD Histogram.Â¹â´ The MACD Line is
simply a stock's twelve-period EMA minus its twenty-six-period EMA.Â¹âµ
This tracks weighted changes in the underlying stock's price. The Signal
Line is a nine-period Exponential Moving Average of the MACD Line.Â¹âµ
Expect prices to reverse direction when the MACD Line crosses the Single
Line like a death gross or golden cross, especially in longer timespans.

The MACD Histogram represents the difference between the MACD Line and
the Signal Line.Â¹âµ Therefore, the underlying stock has high momentum
when the MACD's lines and histogram rise alongside the stock, and this
momentum shifts as the MACD's lines and histograms reverse into negative
convergence and divergence.

Now that you know the technicals, let's look at the MACD on Six Flags
Entertainment Corporation:

![](media/image92.png){width="4.75in" height="2.03in"}

[Â¹â·]{.mark}

Notice strong correlations to \$SIX price and the MACD's lines and
histogram. The MACD is positive when the MACD Line is greater than the
slower-moving Signal Line and negative when the rapidly-changing MACD
Line is below the MACD Signal Line.Â¹â¶ Look for selling opportunities in
extended markets and buying opportunities in lower ones. You can see
that there are strong buying opportunities in \$SIX when the MACD
crosses below zero because there is strong market demand and momentum
behind the stock. You can use MACD to find and confirm temporary
pullbacks to get the best order prices possible when you enter a
position. Use the MACD line to spot reversals in the MACD crossovers,
peaks, troughs, and trends. Look out for green-to-red shifts,
zero-average crossings, peaks, troughs, support levels, and resistance
levels in the MACD histogram.

MACD lines may rarely form short-term trends alongside trading price
action. You can draw trendlines on some particularly strong MACD lines
to predict and trade future breakouts while you simultaneously watch the
two lines for a strong cross.[Â¹âµ Since the MACD is already a reflection
of trends, reversals and trends in the MACD itself, especially with
longer-term candlesticks, are extremely powerful once formed.]{.mark}

The MACD is a solid indicator that you can use on almost any medium-term
to long-term trading setup alongside 50, 100, and 200 moving averages.
Keep these on your charts!

##  The Power Trio of RSI, Stochastics, and Bollinger Bands

RSI, stochastics, and Bollinger Bands all help you identify extreme
price movements in stock price. With this information, you can enter a
trade at its most extreme downswings and exit towards the top with a
technical background and basis behind your positions. These indicators
help increase your trading consistency, especially while swing trading,
by allowing you to easily play off trending or sideways environments
with identifiable minimum and maximum prices.

J. Welles Wilder developed the Relative Strength Index in 1978.Â² The
indicator compares recent gains to recent losses, looking for
oscillating differences in magnitude. Wilder recommends using a
fourteen-period RSI, and this is by far the most popular increment used
today.Â² To calculate the RSI, use the formula:

$$100 - \frac{100}{1 + RS}$$

where

$$RS = \frac{Average\ Gain}{Average\ Loss}$$

and (for a fourteen-period RSI)

$$initial\ RS\  =$$

$$\frac{sum\ of\ gains\ over\ the\ past\ 14\ periods}{14}$$

$$\div \frac{sum\ of\ losses\ over\ the\ past\ 14\ periods}{14}$$

and (for a fourteen-period RSI)

$$subsequent\ RS\  =$$

$\frac{previous\ average\ gain\  \bullet \ 13\  + \ current\ gain}{14} \div \frac{previous\ average\ loss\  \bullet \ 13\  + \ current\ loss}{14}$
[Â¹]{.mark}

This equation gives you a number between 0 and 100. RSI is traditionally
considered overbought when above 70 and oversold when below 30.[Â¹ In
other words, the stock will probably go down soon when the RSI is
extremely high, and it will probably go up soon when the RSI is
extremely low. Yahoo Finance and other modern trading platforms extend
RSI extremum values to 80 and 20 for more pronounced indications of
overbought and oversold territory. When the RSI passes 80, consider
selling. Inversely, consider buying as RSI hits 20.]{.mark}

RSI often lags behind tops and bottoms more so than other indicators in
long-term setups. Just as with stochastics, you may see extended periods
of high RSI levels before a stock comes back down. Bollinger Bands can
help you find extreme peaks when a stock's RSI indicates overbought
territory.Â¹ With that said, oversold RSI levels often prefaces more
immediate price movement. Let's look at an example with Toll Brothers,
Inc. to highlight this principle:

![](media/image93.png){width="4.75in" height="2.01in"}

[âµ]{.mark}

Especially in the 2004-2005 \$TOL run-up, we see extended RSI levels
telling us to sell. However, prices kept rising after a quick drop in
the RSI, showing that the stock had more momentum left. To lower your
risk when making trades based on RSI, try waiting for the indicator to
drop back below 80 when overbought or above 20 when oversold to confirm
a movement reversal.Â³

In this example, the default RSI is relatively stable and presents only
a few compelling buying and selling opportunities. To see more
volatility in the underlying stock, we can decrease the RSI period to
only 2, resulting in the following graph:[â¶]{.mark}

![](media/image94.png){width="4.75in" height="2.02in"}

[âµ]{.mark}

Now, we see significantly more buy and sell signals since smaller price
movements greatly affect the RSI. Combine the RSI with other indicators
to confirm the best entry and exit opportunities for your trades.

RSI, stochastics, MACD, and more can all indicate reversals through
divergence. Divergence occurs when oscillating indicators trend in the
opposite direction of the underlying stock price as opposed to
convergence when the indicator follows the trend direction to show
strength.Â³ Prices might diverge upward while MACD and RSI trend downward
or vice versa. This often occurs in movements when the price is already
extremely high or low, and the indicator often tries to return to
normalcy. Although this movement is slightly rare and often short-lived,
you can use it to strengthen your analysis when you see extreme
oscillation to forecast reversal patterns in your stocks.

Here is an example of divergence with McDonald\'s Corporation. Notice
that it takes a while for the setup to actually complete and break below
the resistance as the MACD and RSI trend opposite to price movements.
There can still be significant gains in a position after the RSI
indicates an oversold condition if other market factors keep pushing a
stock.

![](media/image95.png){width="4.75in" height="1.92in"}

[â·]{.mark}

As soon as the stock shows weakness towards the end of this divergence,
\$MCD crashes through its support and finds new lows. Even if you miss
the breakout in a divergence movement like this, you can use subsequent
bottoms as great buying opportunities. If you are in the position during
the divergence and looking for times to sell, watch for indicators
crossing their midpoints. If you do not get in a trade at an extreme RSI
value, especially watch indicator midpoint values. You will likely see
quick reversals if the RSI shoots through 50 and leaves its midpoint
behind.â´

Stochastics, created by George Lane, are an extremely accurate indicator
when you use it in a stock's historically-proven effective interval
range.[Â¹Â¹]{.mark} The indicator stands as a favorite indicator to many
because of its high accuracy.â¸

Stochastics combines extremely well with other indicators and work
splendidly on their own to help you find the best place to enter and
exit a trade. The indicator uses two lines plotted along a 0-to-100
oscillation chart similar to the RSI with extremes at 80 and 20.

To find the quicker K stochastics line (black by default in Yahoo
Finance), use

$$100 \bullet \frac{current\ close\ price\  \bullet \ lowest\ low\ in\ lookback\ period}{highest\ high\  - \ lowest\ low\ (both\ in\ lookback\ period\ )}$$

To find the slower D stochastics line (red by default in Yahoo Finance),
use

$\frac{closing\ K\ line\ value\ for\ lookback\ periods\ including\ most\ recent\ K\ value}{number\ of\ lookback\ periods}$
[â¹]{.mark}

The default lookback period for the K line is fourteen periods. This
value keeps your stochastics accurate and prevents false signals while
still showing you setups as they arise. The default lookback period for
the D line is three periods. Because the D line is a simple moving
average of the K line, it moves slower than the K line. You can use this
speed difference to spot crossovers in the stochastics lines just as
with MACD lines to indicate potential price reversals, especially at
extreme values below 20 and over 80. With these critical levels,
stochastics measure upward and downward momentum to help you predict
price reversals.[Â¹Â¹]{.mark}

As with all other indicators, the timespan for stochastics changes as
you change the length of individual candlesticks, and longer timespans
generally predict stronger results and trends. Let's look at an example
with Newell Brands Inc. using Stochastics, RSI, and 50 and 200 moving
averages:

![](media/image96.png){width="4.75in" height="2.0in"}

[Â¹â°]{.mark}

In this monthly chart, notice two primary lower stochastic patterns.
First, you can see quick downtrends followed by rapid bounces back up,
presenting you with tremendous buying opportunities. In stochastics,
this shows up as a quick drop and seemingly immediate bounce off the 20
level. Then, there are slower downtrends that gradually decrease
stochastics. In times like 2000 and 2008, \$NWL stayed under the 20
stochastics level for a while until prices started to rally back up. For
a conservative entry into an order like this, wait for the underlying
stock to clearly and deliberately reverse enough to bring the
stochastics straight through the 20 level, rocketing back toward a
midpoint pivot at the 50 stochastics level.

Alongside great buying opportunities when stochastics are low, you can
also find good selling opportunities when stochastics are high. With
that said, stochastics often stay high during extended rallies,
signaling that you might want to wait for the stock to cool off before
entering a long position. If you are already long or looking to take a
short position, watch for the stochastics to crash back below the 80
level after a run-up. High stochastics often persist through big bull
runs. As stochastics eventually break below the 80 level, you want to
watch for an approach to the middle-50 level again to indicate impending
downtrends. We see this especially with the initial 1999, 2007, and 2017
drop in \$NWL. Here is a short-term example on a larger stock to
demonstrate this principle:

![](media/image97.png){width="3.25in" height="4.43in"}

[Â¹Â²]{.mark}

Alongside the stochastics crossing the 20, 50, and later 80 level,
notice how the faster K line breaks through the D line almost perfectly
at the top and bottom of this movement in \$M just like a MACD
crossover.

Furthermore, here is one last example with 1-800-FLOWERS.COM, Inc.:

![](media/image98.png){width="4.75in" height="2.02in"}

[Â¹Â³]{.mark}

Almost every single bottom in the weekly stochastics correlates to a
swift reversal in the market, while the biggest downtrends come at the
end of an extended high-stochastics streak. Combine stochastics with
other indicators, moving averages, and more to find opportune times to
enter and exit a position. Remember that stochastics can remain
overbought and oversold for an extended period. Look at the stochastics
of a stock you are considering and see how it historically performed at
high and low stochastics levels.

When looking for divergence in stochastics, you will likely find the
most success when the indicator is near an extreme 20 or 80 value, as
shown below:

![Chart 2: Slow Stochastic](media/image99.png){width="3.75in"
height="2.15in"}

[Â¹â´]{.mark}

Like with all oscillating indicators, draw lines when you see a
potential indicator trend and correlate them to support and resistance
trendlines in the underlying stock.

A slight variation of stochastics is stochastics RSI. Rather the actual
stock price, stochastics RSI is based on the stochastics of a stock's
Relative Strength Index.Â³Â² You can generally use stochastics and
stochastics RSI interchangeably, though stochastics alone tend to be
more accurate since it tracks the actual underlying stock price.
However, some platforms use stochastics RSI in place of stochastics, so
just know that they work approximately the same. Stochastics RSI often
moves slightly faster than stochastics, as shown below. In the end,
stochastics RSI mimic stochastics to an extreme.

![](media/image100.png){width="4.75in" height="2.34in"}

[Â¹âµ Â¹â¶]{.mark}

[From the highest to lowest chart element, we see the standard
candlestick graph, RSI, stochastics, and stochastics RSI]{.mark}

Stochastics RSI can stay extremely high or low for extended periods
until a stock eventually pulls back or runs up like with traditional
stochastics. Timeframe changes drastically alter stochastic
perspectives. Decrease your candlestick reference length to find more
immediate opportunities, or increase said data to identify swing-trade
movements.

Lastly, we get to Bollinger Bands to identify and profit from extreme
price movements and trend volatility. John Bollinger created Bollinger
Bands in the early 1980s.[Â¹â·]{.mark} You can calculate the three lines
in the Bollinger Bands by using the equations:

$$middle\ band\  = \ simple\ moving\ average\ for\ period\ n$$

$$lower\ band\  = \ middle\ band\  - (period\ n\ standard\ deviation \bullet number\ of\ desired\ standard\ deviations)\ $$

$upper\ band\  = \ middle\ band\  + (period\ n\ standard\ deviation \bullet number\ of\ desired\ standard\ deviations)\ $[Â¹â¸]{.mark}

The default values in Yahoo Finance are twenty for the simple moving
average and two for the number of standard deviations. These are the
Bollinger Bands values most traders use, and they have historically
proven reliable.[Â¹â¹]{.mark} You can change the moving average lookback
period and number of standard deviations to further restrict volatility
movements in the Bollinger Bands if you see few trending signals with
standard settings.

Bollinger Bands adapt to price action volatility by expanding and
contracting because they are built around constantly-changing
standard-deviation bands. Volatility decreases as the upper and lower
bands near the central moving average. Price changes slow down due to
low volume or perhaps complacent investor sentiment. Periods of low
volatility are frequently followed by periods of high volatility in
either the upside or downside.[Â²â°]{.mark} As the Bollinger Bands squeeze
together, stretch out, and repeat, you can see constantly-changing
volatility in an underlying asset, as shown below in Brent Crude Oil:

![](media/image101.png){width="4.75in" height="2.05in"}

[Â²Â¹ Â²Â²]{.mark}

After a five-month period of sideways movement and decreasing
volatility, the market finally tested the upper region of the Bollinger
Bands, signaling an impending increase in volatility. After this test
failed, Brent Crude went through on a rampant three-month selloff of
increased volatility. The tight Bollinger Bands for the five months
prior rapidly expanded as the market radically adjusted its price point
on Brent Crude.

When you notice prolonged periods of low volatility in Bollinger Bands,
be prepared to place your bets when the stock starts moving again. You
can look especially for prices to continue in the direction of a
previous trend.[Â²Â² In the example above, Brent Crude Oil had a long
downtrend prefacing this movement.Â²Â¹ If you are unsure about where a
movement might go, simply wait for the first decisive initial breakout
like with a symmetrical triangle pattern.]{.mark}

In strong downtrend or uptrend, prices can continually run along the
Bollinger Bands as buying or selling remains strong. You can predict a
trend reversal once prices start falling away from extreme values,
perhaps falling back towards moving averages.Â²â´ Watch especially for
prices bouncing off the edge of the Bollinger Bands into the central
moving average as a sign of slowing trends. If the price does not bounce
back away from this average, then the stock may finally reverse. Here is
an example with BlackBerry Limited:

![](media/image102.png){width="4.75in" height="2.04in"}

[Â²Â³]{.mark}

Notice that \$BB actually breaks out of the Bollinger Bands during many
movements from 2013 to 2015. This extreme move often leads to a rapid
correction, although this may not be an extreme correction if there is
enough momentum in the movement, as shown in \$BB's 2014 initial pop out
of the Bollinger Bands. However, sustained breakouts of the Bollinger
Bands later in an upward movement after an already large move may
showcase the end of a movement, as shown above in early 2014 before the
formation of a "W" pattern.[Â²Â³]{.mark}

Two distinct patterns that form in the Bollinger Bands are "M" and "W"
patterns. Ms and Ws play off support and resistance levels just like
many other price setups, but they also respect and bounce off Bollinger
Band trendlines. Below you can see an M setup in Exxon Mobil
Corporation:

![](media/image103.png){width="4.75in" height="3.87in"}

[Â²âµ Â²â¶]{.mark}

[Notice that \$XOM nears the upper band on its second M run-up, but it
lacks the momentum to break through. As it breaks its lower M support
line, the trend reverses and, rather than trading at the top of the
Bollinger Bands, the stock crashes along the bottom and even drops out
of the Bollinger Bands as momentum slows and the MACD bottoms. As this
chart points out, there was also a bearish MACD divergence while the M
formed since prices increased while the MACD decreased, further
strengthening the impending downtrend.Â²âµ]{.mark}

[Contrary to the M pattern, you can use the W pattern to spot impending
uptrends. Here is an example with Nordstrom, Inc.:]{.mark}

![](media/image104.png){width="4.75in" height="3.62in"}

[Â²âµ Â²â·]{.mark}

[The goal with W and M patterns is to wait for the stock to break
through its respective support or resistance. Unlike head-and-shoulders
setups where you can skillfully time the second shoulder, these
Bollinger Bands reversal patterns are less set in stone. As this chart
along with the many other you have seen show, a stock can rally along
the bands in a downtrend, even breaking out of them with extreme
momentum or lack thereof, before reversing price action. In this
example, we see decreasingly less volume in the market after the W
pattern completes in \$JWN as fewer investors want to purchase the stock
while it rallies near the top of the Bollinger Bands. The uncertain
price action in \$JWN only attracts big spikes in volume (and therefore
market participants) when it touches the W resistance line, breaks
through the resistance after bouncing off the Bollinger Bands, and
eventually breaks out of the Bollinger Bands to newfound highs. Look for
selling and cover opportunities as stocks break outside of the Bollinger
Bands for maximum profits.]{.mark}

[You can also use the Bollinger %b and Bollinger Bandwidth indicators to
show volatility and potential divergence. By default in Yahoo Finance,
these indicators use the same standard twenty-period-moving-average and
two-standard-deviation calculations as Bollinger Bands.]{.mark}

Here is an example showcasing Bollinger Bands, Bollinger %b, Bollinger
Bandwidth, and moving averages in Carvana Co.:

![](media/image105.png){width="4.75in" height="1.98in"}

[Â²â¸]{.mark}

Besides simply seeing \$CVNA pop out of the Bollinger Bands, the
Bollinger %b graphs the stock price in relation to the Bollinger Bands
by using an adaptation of the Stochastics formula.[Â²â¹ So, you can watch
for continued %b breakouts above 100 percent of the Bollinger Bands
(aka. when the stock has an extreme upward movement) to indicate strong
momentum behind a stock, forecasting higher future trends. You can see
this in \$CVNA as it runs from just over \$10 to \$70 within a year,
consistently breaking above the Bollinger Bands and respective Bollinger
%b.Â²â¸ As we look into the future, we see more minimums in the Bollinger
%b as prices quickly drop to a strong support around \$35. Continued %b
lower breakouts show a lack of momentum and could predict downwards
price movement. On top of this, we see the daily 50 moving average
quickly approaching the 200, forecasting a potential death cross.
Lastly, you can see a head-and-shoulders setup in recent months. Both of
these indicators' immediate bearish predictions are further supported by
the Bollinger Bands.]{.mark}

[Lastly, the Bollinger Bandwidth shown at the bottom of our \$CVNA chart
showcases volatility by measuring the width of the Bollinger Bands.Â²â¹
High values and peaks here indicate large momentum and volatility, as
you can see in the increasing size of the actual Bollinger Bands' bands
and subsequent moving-average standard deviation. In periods of low
volatility, look out for divergence in the Bollinger %b.]{.mark}

[The Bollinger Bandwidth indicator, with its default parameters, is four
times the coefficient of variation.Â²â¹ You can effectively use this to
find volatile periods and predict future volatility after very calm
periods without looking directly at the Bollinger Bands.]{.mark} For
reference, you calculate this coefficient using the equation:

$coefficient\ of\ variation\  = \frac{standard\ deviation\ of\ price}{average\ price}$
[Â³â°]{.mark}

You can also use this calculation with an asset's historical return and
standard deviation to find a position's risk relative to its return. For
a higher standard deviation (aka. taking on more risk), you should
expect to receive higher returns. This will make your coefficient of
variation lowest for assets that reward you best for the risk level you
take.[Â³Â¹]{.mark} This calculation is especially useful when comparing
long-term bonds or marketable funds. As an example, here are the
coefficients of variation for three major indices tracked by ETFs. Lower
coefficients of variation show better risk-to-return payoffs.

-   SPDR S&P 500
    ETF:$\ \frac{standard\ deviation\ of\ 14.68\%}{annual\ return\ of\ 5.47\%}$
    $= 2.684$

-   PowerShares QQQ
    ETF:$\ \frac{standard\ deviation\ of\ 21.31\%}{annual\ return\ of\ 6.88\%}$
    $= \ 3.097$

-   iShares Russell 2000
    ETF:$\ \frac{standard\ deviation\ of\ 19.46\%}{annual\ return\ of\ 7.16\%}$
    [Â³Â¹]{.mark} $= \ 2.718$

[(fifteen-year lookback period used, 2018)]{.mark}

You can find significantly higher returns with more volatile positions,
but you must be conscious of potential downsides and adapt accordingly
when market sentiment shifts to maximize your returns. It is very
difficult to time overall markets, but stay aware of macroeconomic
factors that could influence your long-term portfolio value.

##  Master Circuit 'Safety Nets' and VWAP for Momentum and Volatility Gains

Volume Weighted Average Price (VWAP) looks at average prices over a
single trading day like a continually growing moving average while
simultaneously accounting for volume.Â² You can use this indicator to
identify support levels, breakout points, and resistances in an intraday
movement. Essentially, the VWAP creates extremely strong psychological
price levels for you automatically.[â´]{.mark}

Although the two look similar on your chart, VWAP often predicts future
intraday price movements more precisely than standalone short-term nine,
twenty, or fifty moving averages because the VWAP accounts for the
intraday volume a stock trades at as a significant factor in its average
price.Â¹ Compared to moving averages which blindly assign the same value
to each individual period, VWAP gives realistic price calculates by
looking at the number of shares exchanged at any given intraday price
level, dynamically adapting to market supply and demand.Â¹
Notwithstanding, moving averages and VWAP still work tremendously
together as a means of identifying significant psychological price
levels in nine-to-noon trades.

To calculate VWAP, use:

$\frac{\sum\ number\ of\ shares\ bought\ *\ specific\ price}{total\ shares\ purchased\ intraday}$
[Â³]{.mark}

or, more simply, the combined total dollars traded in a single day
(which is calculated by multiplying all orders' share amounts by their
respective transaction price) divided by the number of shares exchanged.
So, rather than simply averaging last-trade prices, the VWAP looks at
the actual perceived intraday average market value of a stock based on
volume. Here is an example on a nine-to-noon premarket gainer:

![](media/image106.png){width="4.75in" height="2.81in"}

[âµ Â²â¸]{.mark}

In the early morning hours, the price skyrockets past the VWAP, but
momentum soon slows as a short-term ABCD setup forms and the stock falls
under the VWAP again. However, prices later rally above the VWAP and
complete the ABCD setup right before an uncharted interior Bollinger
Bands M setup (or simply support breakthrough if this is a historic
price level) that brings prices crashing through the VWAP. If the
VWAP-price spread is large, then either the VWAP has to come down, or
the stock has to go up. This principle holds especially true during the
more volatile early-morning hours when prices tend to come back to or
break through the VWAP in large moves.

After this pullback, the stock bounces off the VWAP again to pull a
rapid bull run. If you missed out early on in this trade, you could
still enter here as long as there is enough momentum. You can judge
momentum given the number of shares exchanged daily on a stock versus
its historical average number of shares traded. More traders will bring
more buying and selling pressure to quickly move a stock, especially one
with a low float. Since you can see increasing volume bars at the bottom
of this chart, you could assume there is strong momentum in this stock
during the huge run-up, and perhaps get in during the first one-minute
pullback. Entering on the first one-minute pullback can be especially
risky as you start off, but you can quickly enter and exit large
percent-gain trades by timing the first pullback in an inevitably upward
movement. The trick is identifying strong momentum behind a movement and
having the discipline to take profits or cut losses when necessary. In
this particular trade, the stock tapered off after this morning run-up.
Most nine-to-noon stocks slowly trend downward after a volatile morning
as traders with profits and losses leave the stock for the rest of the
day. Ensure you close your positions in these volatile stocks before the
end of the day, as they can be completely unpredictable in aftermarket
hours (we will talk about how to find these stocks in Secret #36).

Here is another example of a stock first trending above the VWAP but
later falling beneath it:

![](media/image107.png){width="4.75in" height="2.66in"}

[â¶]{.mark}

Notice that the stock quickly climbs as it touches and subsequently
bounces off the initial VWAP price. This VWAP also supports the stock's
initial upward movements and reinforces its later downtrend. As the
stock trends, the VWAP gets closer to the actual price, providing a
potential breakout or downtrend trade when the stock bounces off or
breaks through the psychologically-significant VWAP.

Here is one last example using VWAP alongside upper and lower VWAP
standard deviation bands.[Â²âµ]{.mark} You cannot add these
standard-deviation bands with Yahoo Finance, but you can add them in
most brokers' trading platforms (we will talk more about brokers in
Secret #37).[Â²â¶ Â²â·]{.mark}

![](media/image108.png){width="4.75in" height="2.33in"}

[Â²âµ Â²â¸]{.mark}

Notice that the VWAP (center line) acts as both a support in uptrends
and a resistance in downtrends, like before. As the underlying stock
breaks through this line, it quickly moves either up or down. In this
example, the price runs almost perfectly towards the standard-deviation
VWAP bands (upper and lower lines). You can use these as a profit target
for nine-to-noon trading just like Bollinger Bands in swing and
long-term trading. As you use VWAP with fast-moving stocks, focus on
one-minute and five-minute candles to accurately and automatically find
support and resistance levels in your nine-to-noon trades. Just as a
good limit order fill sets you up for profits, an accurate VWAP can help
you set your order at the best possible price level.

---

Stock exchanges started enforcing circuit breakers after the dreaded
Black Monday in 1987 when the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped
almost 23 percent in one day.[â·]{.mark} Also known as trading curbs,
limit ups, and limit downs, these automated mechanisms forcefully halt
all trading temporarily in volatile markets. Circuit breakers affect the
broad US stock market indices alongside nine-to-noon stocks. In times of
economic panic, circuit breakers give market players a forced break to
reconsider large selloffs in an attempt to decrease
volatility.[â¸]{.mark} By understanding circuit breakers, you can learn
to recognize and avoid them to protect your active and long-term
investments. Without proper circuit-breaker knowledge in nine-to-noon
trades, you can get stuck in illiquid and quickly-unprofitable trades.

Marketwide circuit breakers are currently based on percent changes in
the S&P 500 (2018).â· These circuit breakers take effect when the overall
index drops to a Level 1, Level 2, or Level 3 decline, as showcased
below. Note that Level 1 and Level 2 circuit breakers only affect US
markets if the S&P decline occurs thirty-five minutes before the market
closes, whereas a Level 3 circuit breaker freezes all US-exchange-traded
equities, options, and futures at any time.â¹

  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------
  Circuit Breaker Level   S&P 500 Percent Decline Circuit Breaker Time

  Level 1                 7 percent               15-minute halt

  Level 2                 13 percent              15-minute halt

  Level 3                 20 percent              All trading in
                                                  US-exchange-traded
                                                  equities, options, and
                                                  futures halted for the
                                                  rest of the day
  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------

â·

Futures and options differ from stocks in that they trade outside of
normal market hours. For almost all futures and options traded through
the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, trading hours are Sunday at 6:00 pm EST
to Friday at 5:00 pm EST with a one-hour break each day from 5:00 pm to
6:00 pm.Â¹â° Trading hours are slightly shifted for weather derivatives
which track underlying changes in worldwide heating and cooling levels,
but they still trade just under 23 hours a day, six days a week.Â¹â° Â¹Â¹

Because of these differences, many commodity futures trade with daily
price-movement limits. Unlike index limits which only limit losses,
futures circuit breakers also limit price increases. These limits are
usually the first signal of a trend change after a one or two-day
maximum price movement (forecasting a reversal).[Â¹âµ Futures-contract
limits depend on the underlying commodity traded and are often set
around ten percent per day.Â¹â¶]{.mark}

[If futures circuit breakers are triggered for consecutive days, then
assets can move more the second day and even more the third consecutive
limit day, just as with market-wide circuit breakers (increase amounts
depend on the underlying asset).Â¹âµ Futures contracts that track the S&P
500 and all other global equity indices follow the S&P circuit breaker
system above during market hours alongside a plus or minus five percent
limit aftermarket.Â¹â·]{.mark} [Â¹â¸]{.mark}

Currencies and cryptocurrencies do not have centralized circuit breakers
since they are traded on twenty-four-hour exchanges to provide global
value liquidity (ignoring Bitcoin futures which currently trade like an
equity index, 2018).Â¹Â² Â¹Â³ [Â¹â´ Â¹â¸]{.mark}

Individual stock circuit breakers halt stocks that move over certain
percentage bands during any five-minute period.Â²Â³ Intended to give the
market time to react to extreme volatility, these circuit breakers can
cause your position in a stock to significantly drop in value when it
opens back up. When the stock drops, it can reopen at any price as
exchanges clear and freeze orders and investors change sentiments about
their positions.Â¹â¹

Individual circuit breakers designate securities as Tier 1 or Tier 2
National-Market-System Stocks depending on whether or not they are
included in major US indices.Â²Â¹ The two classifications have different
circuit-breaker percentage parameters for stocks above \$3, as shown in
the circuit-breaker parameter chart below.[Â²Â² Tier 1 Stocks include all
NMS Stocks in the S&P 500, the Russell 1000, and a semi-annually updated
list of unleveraged exchange-traded products that average at least
\$2,000,000 traded per day.Â²â´ Tier 2 Stocks include all other securities
and funds less broker-dealer or corporation-issued options called rights
and warrants.Â²â´ Leveraged exchange-traded-products' percentage
parameters are the same as the following table multiplied by their
leverage ratio.Â²â´]{.mark}

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Previous Closing Price            | Circuit-Breaker Percentage        |
|                                   | Parameter (five-minute change)    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| \> \$3.00                         | Tier 1: 5 percent                 |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | Tier 2: 10 percent                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| \$0.75 up to and including \$3.00 | 20 percent                        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| \< \$0.75                         | Lesser of \$0.15 or 75 percent    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

[Â²Â²]{.mark}

Price band percentages are doubled during the first 15 and last 25
minutes of trading, and trading must persist outside of the percentage
bands for 15 seconds to trigger a circuit breaker.[Â²Â²]{.mark}

[Circuit breakers initially halt trading for five minutes.Â²â° If the
exchange that issued the halt still deems the security unready to trade
due to significant imbalances between buy and sell orders, then they can
extend the halt up to ten minutes, after which other exchanges can
resume trading in over-the-counter markets thereby reopening the
stock.Â²â°]{.mark}

Here is an example of a circuit-breaker halt on Planet Green Holdings
Corp. stock, a premarket gainer and nine-to-noon trade:

![](media/image109.jpeg){width="4.75in" height="2.14in"}

[Â²â¹]{.mark}

\$PLAG was halted after the first fifteen minutes of trading, so its
circuit-breaker parameters were not doubled. In the five minutes before
the halt, the stock moved from around \$8.50 to around \$11.00. \$PLAG
is a Tier 2 stock since it is not an exchange-traded-product or an NMS
Stock in the S&P 500 or Russell 1000. Since the stock closed at \$2.67
the day before this massive movement, its maximum five-minute percentage
parameter was 20 percent. Using the approximate-price equation

$$8.50 + (8.50 \bullet 0.2) = \$ 10.20,$$

we find that the stock traded above its circuit-break level up to the
daily high for fifteen seconds before a five-minute halt was enacted.
Notice that volume significantly increased just before and just after
the circuit breaker. On the way up, you almost always want to sell out
of a position if you see a potential circuit-breaker halt forming.
Circuit breakers are extremely risky because you have no control or clue
where a stock will open after the halt.[Â¹â¹ Sometimes momentum carries up
into another halt, but stocks also often go through tremendous drops
after halts, especially after a large run-up in a nine-to-noon
stock.]{.mark}

Note that \$PLAG did a twenty-five to one reverse split fourteen days
before this movement on November 19, 2018.[Â²â¹ Reverse splits can be
huge, unrealized catalysts in nine-to-noon stocks. Additionally, the
stock broke through a recent resistance at \$4.75 during this
movement.Â²â¹]{.mark}

If you identify a potential circuit breaker, try to exit with your
profits before trading freezes. The untold price-volatility risk of
frozen trading rarely exceeds potential intraday returns. Remember that
halted stocks cannot change price, but investors can still cancel
unfilled orders and trade options during the halt.Â³Â¹

More rarely, stocks can halt because of more obscure news or regulatory
concerns that can last much longer than traditional circuit breakers.[Â³â°
Among others, three standout halts are the T12, H10, and T1 halts.Â¹â¹ All
three of these infrequent halts essentially occur only in nine-to-noon
stocks.]{.mark}

[A notably rare T12 halt occurs when the trading exchange requests
additional information from the underlying company, often after a
significantly volatile trading period. The SEC can initiate a T12 halt
on a stock for up to ten business days at any time they think the
investing public may be at risk.Â³Â² Often, prices in T12-halted stocks
seem manipulated or over-speculatively traded.]{.mark}

[]{.mark}H10 halts occur when the SEC suspends trading on a stock.[Â³â°
These halts can last for days or weeks as the SEC investigates criminal
manipulation of a given stock.Â¹â¹ These halts are most common in penny
stocks traded on OTC pink sheets since these often-poor-quality
companies do not meet standard exchange listing requirements and may not
stay credible with the SEC, sometimes trading at fractions of a penny
with exceedingly low liquidity and volume.Â³Â³ These halts in particular
can lead to extreme price drops in penny stocks.Â¹â¹ You can avoid these
halts and make strong profits in these extremely-cheap stocks, but you
should find safer, consistent growth with nine-to-noon stocks which we
will explore in Secret #36.]{.mark}

In an uncommon T1 halt, trading is halted as a company issues news
during market hours while freezing trading during the press release to
allow investors to consider their position.[Â³â° When stocks make large
moves based on rumors, the underlying company might issue this forced
circuit breaker to release news and remedy rash investor buy or sell
panics with level-headed facts about a company\'s fundamental growth.Â¹â¹
These halts can last hours and potentially reverse large run-ups based
on speculation and invalid catalysts or attempt to calm investors with
stability as the market sells, fearful of corporate bankruptcy.Â¹â¹ Either
way, these halts freeze market liquidity and present a large risk in the
very rare cases that they occur, but there is little you can do to stop
or predict a T1 halt. Avoid the halts you can predict, and simply
recognize and scale out of the ones you cannot.]{.mark}

##  Transform Your Patterns with Fusion Strategies

It is tough to predict the exact top or bottom of any stock movement.
Nobody is perfect in financial analysis, and many long-term prices
average out over time. However, you can get optimal fill prices by using
trendlines and indicators. These rarely form perfect setups on their
own, but they present compelling opportunities when used together to
identify trends. Some indicators work better than others depending on
the stock you are trading, whereas other assets rely more on trendlines.
Try out different indicators and trendlines on stocks to find ones that
work in a given situation. All of the indicators you have learned about
work well in different analysis situations. You may get better results
with an indicator or perhaps find a stronger trendline when you change
the time frame of a stock chart. Most indicators look radically
different as you change from hourly to weekly candlesticks. As you find
the asset-management time commitment that suits you, you will naturally
figure out which indicators and trendlines work best alongside your
trading strategy. All indicators eventually return to normalcy.

Here is a standard chart on Amazon.com, Inc. using every indicator we
have discussed:

![](media/image110.png){width="4.75in" height="2.04in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

Try to efficiently and systematically remove indicators from your charts
that you see no setup in until only a few indicators remain. Especially
with shorter-term charts, you may base positions entirely on price
action, trendlines, and VWAP alone. Still, indicators can help in any
given situation. MACD, RSI, and stochastics in particular seem helpful
in this trading situation. However, other indicators like Ichimoku
Clouds may prove less useful in your analyses.

You can choose from hundreds of indicators in Yahoo Finance and your
brokerage-specific trading software.[Â³ We have gone through some of the
most-adapted indicators that work well in a diverse range of trading
situations. Try these indicators out on your stock charts and see what
works well for you.]{.mark} If something does not work for you in a
certain situation, remove it to declutter your charts.

For reference, Ichimoku Clouds plot moving averages and "clouds" derived
from moving averages to predict a stock's current trend and forecast
future crossovers.[â´ You can use these slightly-messy clouds to identify
a current stock trend just as you compare current prices to moving
averages. There are many random indicators such as this one that add
complexity to most analysis.]{.mark}

[Master the indicators given in the book. Figure out exactly when to use
each one and make a few trades based on any combination of them. Once
you master these core indicators and trendlines, you can move onto more
obscure indicators, but always remember to stick to your principles and
trading style that you will establish over time.]{.mark}

[Here is an example of overanalyzing]{.mark} Six Flags Entertainment
Corporation with five trendlines, a weekly 200 moving average,
stochastics, and MACD.

![](media/image111.png){width="4.75in" height="2.13in"}

[Â³]{.mark}

These trendlines seem valid in this movement, but the sheer number of
support and resistance levels makes \$SIX difficult to analyze. By
simplifying your trendlines to two or three primary trends, you can
streamline your order-entry triggers stop-loss levels based on drops or
rises into a stock's strongest trendlines. The overall number of
trendlines depends on the stock in question, but try to find the
strongest diagonal trendlines along historical support and resistance
levels. Combine any simplified trendlines with strong, reliable
indicators to clear up any remaining price confusion.

[Alongside indicators, company fundamentals are crucial for long-term
and swing-trade investments. Does the underlying company make
money?]{.mark} Here is an example with Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.:

![](media/image112.png){width="4.75in" height="1.96in"}

[Â²]{.mark}

Before the initial run-up that formed the recent wedge shown above,
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. invested significant time, energy, and
resources into developing a new line of consumer-processing microchips
that significantly outperformed their previous product generation.[âµ
Advanced Micro Devices was still unprofitable and down from its
historical highs, but they showed potential innovation in their
industry. After the Company launched these chips and retook a larger
market share in the technology-chip sector, the stock skyrocketed from
around five to fifteen dollars.âµ Â² However, this move proved to be
short-lived as the stock soon crashed to a support at \$10.Â² Yet, over
the next year, \$AMD proved very profitable and took a large market
share from Intel Corporation.â¶ With this fundamental growth, the company
broke out of its downward wedge and flew to historical highs. You can
then time your exit from this trade or enter a short position based on
previous resistance levels in historical large run-ups. The large
previous run-ups also show immense long-term volatility in \$AMD and
further supports a long trade in the stock for the hope of a similar
run-up. By using your technical analysis skills, you can find a strong
resistance just under the peak of two previous run-ups in 2000 and 2006
plus at the very top of the 2001 upswing at \$34.65.Â² You could also
find a more conservative price target for the recent movement just over
\$31 based on historical consolidation at this price level in \$AMD's
2006 run-up and average peak in the 2001 bounceback.Â² With both
fundamental analysis and technical analysis, you can find the best
opportunities to buy, after the wedge breakout in this position, and the
best places to sell, historical resistances in this position.]{.mark}

[In-depth research about corporate fundamental and overall market shifts
are key to long-term investments but matter much less for nine-to-noon
trading compared to immediate news catalysts. By combined fundamental
knowledge of any company with technical analysis and financial-report
analysis, you can ensure the strongest long-term stock picks and best
order entries on macro-factor-influenced positions.]{.mark}

[Stay dynamic with your lookback periods and indicator usage. Put
indicators on your charts and find ones that work well in different
scenarios. Fluidly transition from]{.mark} daily to weekly to monthly
candlesticks when analyzing long-term performance, especially with
moving averages. With nine-to-noon trading, find historical support and
resistance levels and trade with shorter one-minute, five-minute, and
fifteen-minute intervals. For swing trading, find a sweet middle ground
with hourly or four-hour candles. With enough indicators, trendlines,
flexibility, and practice, your trading will surely improve.

##  Portfolio Harmony and the Essence of Diversification

Stocks are inherently volatile and you can lose your investments when
you put all your eggs in one basket. By establishing, understanding, and
following diversification principles, you will ensure long-term success
in your retirement planning, savings-goal investments, and nine-to-noon
trading.

Stocks may swing up or down fifty percent in a year. You can minimize
your portfolio\'s volatility and improve overall performance by
investing in a wide range of companies in a variety of industries.[Â²
You]{.mark} do not want your whole portfolio reliant on three stocks i[n
the unfortunate event two of them tank in]{.mark} one year.

The best path to long-term diversification is to limit your exposure to
any single investment. Do not let any single stock take up over five to
seven percent of your portfolio.[Â¹ By following this rule, you ensure
that single positions do not determine the success of your overall
portfolio.]{.mark}

You can never be 100 percent sure on any stock pick. So, your whole
portfolio should determine your success rather than a few stocks[.Â¹ With
a wider range of assets, you give yourself many more chances to succeed
while you slowly weed out underperforming investments.]{.mark} Give your
losing stocks time to play out if they have a strong underlying setup,
business plan, etc. before you cut them from your portfolio.
Simultaneously, let your winners run until you think they have no steam
left. Remember that the risk with any investment is that the entire
company goes bankrupt and the stock goes to \$0. Companies with long
histories might be less likely to go bankrupt, but you still do not want
to let one stock take too much of your portfolio. By diversifying, you
minimize the impact individual downtrends will have on your portfolio.

Funds stand out as one great exception to the five to seven percent
rule. Since ETFs and mutual funds already invest in a wide range of
assets, all you have to do is consider how they balance their
investments. Does the fund simply follow an index, diversifying it
across the entire market? Perhaps it focuses on a specific sector. Does
the fund invest in high-yield corporate bonds or Treasury bills? Perhaps
they dabble in foreign equity assets through individual investments or
market-tracking indices. Nonetheless, these funds are already inherently
diversified, so you may need to worry significantly less about
diversification with these options.

Take the Invesco PowerShares QQQ ETF for example. This fund aims to
mimic the Nasdaq-100 Index which includes 100 of the largest domestic
and international non-financial companies listed on the Nasdaq stock
market based on market capitalization. [Â³]{.mark} [â´ Since it has around
100 stocks, the ETF is already fairly diversified. By balancing a few
funds in other market sectors with the technology-heavy \$QQQ, you can
easily create a diversified portfolio suitable for reliable long-term
growth. However, this fund alone may not give you ample diversification,
especially in downtrends, because it focuses heavily in leisure-spending
companies and holds particularly high individual weightings. For
example, Invesco gives Apple, Inc. a 12.44 percent weight, Amazon.com,
Inc. an 11.15 percent weight, and Microsoft Corporation a 10.01 percent
weight in the fund as of September 30, 2018.âµ Still, this leaves dozens
and dozens of other companies diluting the volatility of these stocks
with their own strong collective performances even though many are
individually weighted under one percent of the ETF.âµ Most ETFs and
mutual funds are, by definition, well-diversified. The biggest risk you
will see with these are market-sector dependence. You could counteract
this sector-dependence with a more stable, historically-performing
industry such as energy or industrial stocks depending on current market
sentiment and macroeconomic trends.]{.mark}

[On Yahoo Finance, you can hover over the "Industries" tab to get a
condensed list of nine major global industries or click the tab to get
Yahoo's full list of 215 industries ranging from Auto Parts Stores to
Cement (as of 2018).â¶ By spreading your investments across different,
non-correlated markets, you can significantly increase your long-term
diversification to mitigate short-term volatility. These new markets
also open up opportunities for technical analysis to find strong
potential stock picks.Â¹]{.mark}

You do not want your entire portfolio to go down because you are in
technology or energy stocks exclusively. Let's look at an elementary
example to showcase the importance of having many market sectors
captured in your overall portfolio:

![](media/image113.png){width="4.5in" height="3.4in"}

[â·]{.mark}

If you invest entirely in a company that sells sunscreen, you will see
strong growth during the sunny parts of the year, but poor performance
when it rains. The reverse would occur if you placed all of your assets
in the umbrella company. By balancing your investments between
industries, you can achieve consistently reliable returns.â¸ The same
methodology holds true in real-world industries, although correlation is
slightly tougher to calculate. Everyone needs basic materials and
utilities, but services and consumer goods might slump when markets run
into trouble and spending decreases, especially luxury good companies
(spending includes credit).

To see if two or more stocks or funds you are considering strongly
correlate, try comparing them in Yahoo Finance. Simply fullscreen a
chart and press "Comparison." Here is an example with Visa Inc. (\$V),
Mastercard Incorporated (\$MA), and American Express Company (\$AXP):

![](media/image114.png){width="4.75in" height="2.01in"}

[Â¹Â²]{.mark}

From highest to lowest final return, we see Mastercard Incorporated,
Visa Inc., and American Express Company.

Although \$MA finishes slightly above \$V, the two stocks have performed
almost identically over the past decade or so while \$AXP severely
underperformed the duo. Therefore, we may choose to invest more of our
credit-card-sector fund in \$V since they currently pay a .75 percent
dividend compared to \$MA's .5 percent dividend.[Â¹â°]{.mark} Although
\$AXP currently pays a 1.48 percent dividend, its poor historical
performance makes it a seemingly worse investment than \$V and \$MA in
upward markets.[Â¹Â¹]{.mark} Notice, however, the all three credit-card
companies follow the same general trends with high correlation, American
Express Company just rises less historically.Â¹Â² The same principles
should hold true for other companies in this market sector such as Chase
Bank or Discover Financial Services. Therefore, we can diversify our
overall portfolio with other market sectors and other stocks perhaps
less reliant on the banking and financials sector.

The point of diversification is to protect you from rampant volatility
in sector-heavy asset markets. By diversifying your portfolio, you can
ensure consistent returns when all aspects of the market boom. However,
remember that market sectors still perform and recover when overall
indices do well. If you have smart sector-dependence, you will be fine
with long-term picks that provide growing value because sectors
historically move together, as shown below with American-only
equally-balanced and yearly-rebalanced mid to large-cap sector indices
(terminology from Secret #16):

![](media/image115.png){width="4.75in" height="3.45in"}

[Â¹â¸ Â¹â¹]{.mark}

From highest to lowest final return, we see Consumer Staples, Health
Care, Energy, Materials, Financials, Industrials, Consumer
Discretionary, Technology, Telecom, and Utilities.

So, although one sector may boom while another one busts, the overall
market increases together in the long-term. In this example, notice that
consumer staples offered the highest historical sector return with the
second lowest volatility. Not bad!

When you start out small, you might not be able to fully diversify due
to your account size or commission costs. You might even have to avoid
larger stocks until you start depositing into and growing your account
unless you are buying funds that are already diversified. It is tough to
balance a \$5,000 portfolio around Amazon.com, Inc. when it costs
upwards of \$2,000 at its 2018 highs, but significantly easier enter the
market buying computer-gaming-peripheral-company Razer Inc. for
\$0.15.[Â¹Â³ Â¹â´ The great thing about stocks of all sectors and sizes is
that you can buy as many shares as you want to achieve your desired
position size as long as the price for one share fits into your
portfolio.]{.mark} By working towards strong diversification, you will
ensure long-term success no matter short-term market conditions.

As you near retirement and savings goals, reference the following
recommended bond-allocation tables. These are simply suggestions, and
you may choose to raise or lower your exposure to bonds versus equities
depending on overall market conditions. If you see a strong economy
brewing, perhaps wait to invest in bonds until interest rates follow.
Similarly, you may invest more in bonds during a high point in the
overall market.

![Non-Bond Allocation vs. Years to
Retirement](media/image116.png){width="4.75in" height="1.91in"}

[Â²â°]{.mark}

From highest to lowest final non-bond allocations, we see Aggressive
Growth, Aggressive, Moderate (Betterment's), Vanguard, Conservative, and
Ultra Conservative.

![Non-Bond Allocation vs. Years to Savings
Goal](media/image117.png){width="4.75in" height="2.69in"}

[Â²â°]{.mark}

From highest to lowest final non-bond allocations, we see Aggressive
Growth, Aggressive, Moderate, Betterment, Conservative, and Ultra
Conservative.

Many recommend these bond trends near retirement and savings goals
because of the following well-documented tendencies and inherent
volatility in the stock market. The dots in the center of each
volatility bar represent the average excess stock-market return over
average high-grade corporate bond index returns.Â³â´

![](media/image118.png){width="4.75in" height="3.25in"}

[Â²Â¹ Â³â´]{.mark}

Notice that, in the long-term, stock returns historically prove
superior. This data extends from 1926 to 2014, covering all recent stock
market crashes, panics, downturns, and more.[Â²Â¹ Â³â´ Regardless,]{.mark}
stocks still average out to grow your wealth through uncommon returns.

As you diversify your portfolio, always remember correlation. The more
uncorrelated your stock picks, the better your portfolio diversification
becomes. Fund-manager Ray Dalio's "holy grail" chart shown below shows
this principle well:

![](media/image119.png){width="4.749260717410324in"
height="3.4340277777777777in"}

[Â²âµ Â²â¶]{.mark}

On the left side of this chart, we see the risk of any individual
investment based on its return. The asset could go up ten percent, down
ten percent, or more in either direction in periods extending past
single-standard-deviation yearly movements. The standard deviation
simply measures inherent asset volatility. As you add more assets with
similar risk and returns, the trendlines show how your return to risk
changes based on the correlation of your underlying positions. At a
certain point, your risk reduction depends on the correlation of the
underlying assets more so than the number of diversifying investments.
At seven or eight assets, you decrease your risk of losing money in a
given year from forty percent individually to eleven percent with
perfectly uncorrelated returns like in our umbrella-sunscreen example.
As you focus more on correlated market sectors, you may expose yourself
to more correlation risk, but you can simultaneously push for higher
returns through active management. Estimate your potential profits
versus stop-loss maximum risks to work towards improving your
profitability through technical analysis. Alternatively, decrease your
long-term risk through global diversification and alternative
investments (which we will explore soon). With fifteen or twenty solid,
uncorrelated return streams, you can minimize your total risk while
maximizing steady returns, following the five to seven percent rule.Â²â·
You will not lose your ten percent return, but you will reduce your risk
through other investments with more predictable performance. Your
overall portfolio will grow over time, but individual growth is blended
into the performance of all your other positions to minimize volatility.
With five times less portfolio deviation, you can quintuple your
return-to-risk ratio in any given portfolio.[Â²â·]{.mark}

You can use this mindset to minimize your investment risks through the
"holy grail" while still fighting for market-beating returns through
technical analysis and individual equities. Always consider how much
time you have to be aggressive in the market, understanding that it is
okay to take on more risk and higher returns when you have a long time
ahead to recapture losses while winners run. Nonetheless, you can avoid
large portfolio losses with investments in the broad, uncorrelated
markets shown below:

![](media/image120.png){width="7.290755686789152in"
height="3.929333989501312in"}

[Â²â°]{.mark}

Red values indicate high correlations, whereas green values indicate a
low correlation to each items' respective counterpart. Notice that
essentially all US equities are closely correlated, as these assets
follow major US market indices. Notwithstanding, these assets provide
extremely strong long-term gains as long as you can weather out market
downturns. Remember the dollar-cost-averaging principle that sits at the
base of value investing when low stock prices tumble. As you gradually
purchase assets, you can average your fill prices down over time. For
example, you could buy \$200 of a stock every year or perhaps invest
\$150 into a certain fund every month. If the price of the asset
decreases, you can gradually purchase more with the same amount of cash,
as you expect the price to increase in the long-term. If the price
increases, you can add to your position knowing that you are adding to
your long-term growth potential on top of current gains.[Â²â¸ This
methodology is splendid for long-term low-management investors who want
to ensure consistent, fair prices. You can further improve your
price-fill quality by employing technical analysis to find great buying
and selling opportunities in the market.]{.mark}

REITs are Real Estate Investment Trusts. You can use these to take
advantage of real-estate returns without the active management needed to
collect rent every month. These trusts often yield high dividends and
present compelling long-term opportunities in good housing markets.

There are unheard of value opportunities in long-term American
equity-asset markets that take advantage of the prolific and
regenerative US Economy. The US stock market makes up over half of the
entire world's publicly traded stock market.[Â²Â²]{.mark} With that said,
some investors turn to foreign equity markets for risk management
because most global economies are not immediately correlated, as shown
above.

Some investors turn to emerging foreign markets in search of extremely
high returns as new economies boom.Â¹âµ The following scatterplot reports
average GDP growth and stock returns over the long run from 1900 to 2009
in global market indices. Although you may outperform the market through
specific stock picks, most global indices underperform the American
markets, even when they have rapid, emerging economic growth. Remember
that most of a stock's price depends on its underlying public
perception. Just because a stock is expensive does not mean it has a
large market capitalization or vice versa. Look for corporate value, not
just cheap or expensive stock price. In our example with Singapore-based
company Razer Inc. earlier, \$RAZFF shares cost a nickel and a dime, but
the underlying company is worth \$1,333,000,000 (2018).Â¹â´ Rather, pay
attention to historical price trends to predict where future market
performance might move. Keep in mind the following international data is
from the most recent 2009 bottom in the US stock market.

![](media/image121.png){width="4.75in" height="3.39in"}

[Â¹âµ Â¹â¶ Â¹â·]{.mark}

So, "emerging" markets might not be the highest growth candidates for
you, but international diversification is still very popular. Four of
the countries above seemingly outperformed America, after all. Although
it costs more time and money to spread your eggs into many baskets, you
can benefit from long-term diversification in international markets
through ETFs tracking foreign index funds alongside individual stocks
and bonds. Additionally, you can time emerging market stocks to take
advantage of superb growth as part of your international portfolio no
matter how long you invest in foreign markets. Just remember important
socio-political factors can affect global equity performance and bond
payments. As long as you do not try to time market indices, there are
strong international profits to compliment your domestic holdings in
bull and bear markets.

Here is an updated 1900-to-2016 comparison of global market returns
post-inflation. Remember that inflation in these markets includes
foreign-currency-valuation changes unless shareholders trade an
underlying stock through American markets or perhaps a derivative or
share subclass traded Over-the-Counter or on the Pink Sheets. You may
see some of these cheap stocks in nine-to-noon trading. For long-term
investors, it is fine to invest in reputable companies listed on these
less-than-par exchanges as long as you know the value and performance
history of the stock you buy. With that said, these stocks historically
repel investors because of low listing requirements and often low
trading volume on the pink sheets. Look for good liquidity before taking
a trade for any timespan in these markets.

![country stock market returns risk
adjusted](media/image122.jpg){width="4.0in" height="5.14in"}

[Â²Â²]{.mark}

You can make strong returns in foreign markets as long as you focus on
long-term thinking and ideologies. Analyze global indices and invest in
areas where you see high-return potential with minimal risk. If you
ignore short-term market movements and invest in strong foreign
companies, you are sure to find high-yielding investment opportunities.

But please, for all that is good, do not buy the \^FTSE^Â®^. The Footsie
or Financial Times Stock Exchange 100 Index is an index of the largest
100 market-cap companies on the London Stock Exchange.[Â²Â³]{.mark} Here
is the FTSE's performance (lower final performance) relative to the S&P
500 (higher final performance).

![](media/image123.png){width="4.75in" height="2.01in"}

[Â²â´]{.mark}

Index-to-index, the Europeans markets historically underperformed
American markets.

Here is a Fidelity infographic showcasing four differently-diversified
portfolios. The calculated performance is based on domestic indices,
foreign indices, bond indices, and Treasury-bill interest rates from
1926 to 2015, assuming reinvested dividends and coupon payments.

![](media/image124.jpg){width="4.75in" height="2.68in"}

[Â²â¹ Â³âµ]{.mark}

[Though you may need especially less diversification in your early
investing years, these portfolio balances represent general market
diversification sentiment. Fidelity in particular often emphasizes bond
fund holdings. For color reference, the growth portfolio has a five
percent stake in short-term investments, twenty-one percent in foreign
stock, twenty-five percent in bonds, and forty-nine percent in US stock.
Consider whether or not a portfolio balanced away from stocks works best
for you, especially considering your age. With a longer time horizon,
you can weather out market crashes and take advantage of
historically-higher equity-asset growth.]{.mark}

Furthermore, we can see that diversified portfolios provide safe havens
in economic downturns in exchange for their lower long-term returns. Try
to find a balance between safety and growth, perhaps a
dynamically-changing balance depending on macroeconomic conditions. Just
remember that it is much easier to time individual stocks than market
indices.

![](media/image125.png){width="4.75in" height="2.04in"}

[Â³â°]{.mark}

Before we move on to diversification in nine-to-noon trading, please
write five to seven percent down in the blank space below (preferably
with pen).

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Use this percent allocation for long-term low-management diversified
portfolios to prevent any one company or factor from influencing your
portfolio too much. As your investing experience grows, you may decide
to change these numbers as you see fit to build your opportune
diversified portfolio. It is okay to take higher risks in companies you
believe in when you understand the potential downside in even the most
certain stocks; this knowledge simply comes with experience. However,
remember that any position can go south no matter how great it looks if
public perception drastically changes.

Diversified portfolios are the basis for building retirements, college
plans, and long-term savings-goal funds. Continue writing down other
principles you learn through trading, as these will help you develop
your overall trading strategy and improve your market returns. If five
or twenty out of 100 companies perform extraordinarily poorly in the
long-term, you can still prove extremely profitable through
diversification. Just do not put everything you have in your Enron
employee stock purchase plan. In the short-term, expect temporary
losses, as it is always difficult to time the exact top or bottom on any
movement.

As you enter nine-to-noon trading, diversification lines fade because
you actively adapt to market risk and set precise stop-losses to limit
your risk while you work towards market-beating returns. Your position
size, given enough liquidity, is essentially what determines your
trading income once you master nine-to-noon trading.

Consistent, high average profits are key to nine-to-noon success. As
long as you can make more than you lose, you will prove successful with
repetitive trades. One extreme trading setup can exceed your weekly
profit goals. They key is taking reasonable positions with excellent
setups rather than taking as many trades as possible. You do not need to
be perfect, but you should understand your trading and work towards
better future consistency, profit/loss ratios, and trade success
percentages.Â³Â¹

Let's look at the *profit trifecta,* pioneered by trader Ross Cameron:

![](media/image126.png){width="4.75in" height="3.29in"}

[Â³Â¹]{.mark}

As you practice trading, you can work to improve your skills and move
towards the center of the profit trifecta to find consistent profit,
high success rates, and a strong profit/loss ratio.[Â³Â²]{.mark}

[You never have to be perfect with trading, but you can work towards
consistent, disciplined trades to grow closer to the center of the
trifecta. It might make sense for you to have a temporarily lower win
percentage if you take many trades because of your underlying trading
strategy.]{.mark} That is fine as long as you consistently take
high-quality setups with good risk-reward ratios and diversification
principles. Your trading will significantly improve with patience.

For nine-to-noon trading, your main goal is to pay as little market
tuition as possible while learning to be a consistently profitable
trader. At first, we can set loose diversification standards because you
will learn over time how much to put in your positions based on your
underlying technical analysis, setup confidence, and the stock momentum.

Set aside a certain amount of money for active trading. Then, calculate
how much you want your average order size to be worth. Generally, try to
start off risking lower proportions of your nine-to-noon fund, and work
your way up to your own reasonably-sized positions over time as you
discover how to manage risk with strong market returns.

Here is an example of what happens to a \$2,000 trading account when you
double your money four times, but the market fools you into one bad
trade and you lose half of your portfolio:

![Account Value](media/image127.png){width="4.75in" height="2.93in"}

By continually risking all your cash, you present significant growth
opportunities, but you also expose yourself to rapid downtrends. As you
start trading, learn your principles with smaller trades and work your
way up you to consistent profitability. Perhaps risking one-quarter of
your day trading fund in the example above will help you find consistent
growth and leave you less stressed when you inevitably lose a trade.
Nonetheless, risk what you are willing to lose and always close out your
nine-to-noon positions by the end of the day, as aftermarket movements
in such stocks can be irrevocably unpredictable. Sticking to stop-losses
also helps limit your losses and psychological burden because you pass
off the responsibility of exiting potentially bad trades to a computer.

Once you find consistent profits with strong risk-to-reward ratios, you
can start to expose yourself to higher upsides and losses with larger
cash positions. The technical skills you build while learning allow you
to measure your performance through percent gains that reveal your
potential profits and losses. You trade for the upside, but you have to
prepare for the downside and analyze exactly how much you risk on
average.

To streamline your order entries, use a handheld calculator to quickly
divide your intended value per trade by the share price of the stock you
are trading. Use this rapid calculation method to ensure consistent
order size for all trades, allowing you to consciously grow your
position sizes since you account for your trades' dollar values every
time you press buy. Especially for nine-to-noon trading, this
handheld-calculator order-entry method lets you enter and exit positions
quickly before a stock runs away from you.

Note that many active-trading platforms offer "order review" windows
after you press buy. For nine-to-noon trading, I highly recommend
disabling this review screen as it slows your trading down, often
stopping you from getting the best possible fills in volatile
situations.

Start with one position at a time when trading. You can start to trade
more stocks as your skills improve, especially if you have multiple
monitors. Still, look for quality rather than quantity. It is better to
start slow and make one great trade rather than making three poor trades
before ten o'clock. With one position, you can think about what went
wrong in your position intraday and better your future trading with your
self-reflection. Your active profits and losses are not your entire
portfolio, but rather a certain percent of your active-trading fund that
integrates with your overall long-term portfolio

Nine-to-noon trading requires clear thinking and disciplined
stop-losses. You need to be emotionally unattached from your stock
positions so you can holistically consider their performance both in and
out of a trade without letting emotions cloud your vision.

Do not try to catch a falling knife when you first start out. Accept any
early-morning losses and move on. If you lose money on any stock,
*ignore it for the rest of the day.* Conversely, *stick with winners*
while simultaneously looking for new nine-to-noon opportunities. Set
hard limits on how much you can lose in a day and follow them! Give
yourself time and find the patience to uncover the perfect setup rather
than trading and trading with no defined strategy for consistent
profits.

Impartially study your own investing habits and psychological rules to
better your trading. Anger and greed can drive your trading into a
stress-filled, unprofitable state.Â³Â³ *Never get mad at the market or
yourself.* Try to clear your mind before you start screening in the
morning (see Secrets #1 and #36). I regularly meditate in the morning
and at night after reading my long-term goals to clear my emotions and
prepare myself to tackle the market. Additionally, electronic music
helps me stay sharp while trading. Figure out what works well to relax
your mind and stick with it.

##  The Trader's Lens Demystifies Stock Selection

Stock screeners are the most vital key to finding nine-to-noon stocks.
They are also very useful for long-term picks when you search for
certain types of companies to trade. Use screeners to identify where
money is and where money will be.

As you first look for long-term investments, try to find companies you
already know about. This will streamline and simplify your investment
research. After you identify, approve, or reject potential assets, you
can use stock screeners to find companies with compelling fundamental
buy signals.

Stock screeners simply take any certain set of parameters into account
and spit out the resulting stocks. You can filter by price changes, key
statistics, accounting statistics, earnings, net margin, book value, and
more with Yahoo Finance under the "Screeners" tab.[Â¹]{.mark} With these
options, you can configure custom screeners to look for undervalued
stocks, growing stocks, active stocks, industry-specific stocks, foreign
holdings, and any other circumstance you can think of by combining the
many filters Yahoo Finance offers. Try quickly finding potential
investments by combining your filters into a concise stock screener!

Other great websites for long-term stock screeners are Finviz,
Chartmill, and StockFetcher. Finviz works similarly to Yahoo Finance,
but you can look at additional filters such as percent of shares short,
dividend payout ratio, and technical factors.Â² Chartmill lets you look
at specific underlying corporate fundamental analysis through their
analyzer alongside more technical factors like support and resistance
levels, flag setups, and moving averages.[Â³ Lastly, StockFetcher lets
you directly analyze values in technical indicators like the Relative
Strength Index, Stochastics, and MACD to identify potential swing
trades.â´]{.mark}

All of the aforementioned screening websites provide tremendous starter
screeners to help you find potential movers. With this narrowed-down
search, you can quickly build a diversified portfolio or possibly make a
few picks to compliment your long-term indices. If you put in the time
to research here, you can find previously unheard of stocks that may
outperform your overall portfolio.

For nine-to-noon trading, you will almost exclusively look at price,
percent gain, and volume. With these three factors, you can quickly
identify nine-to-noon stocks before the market opens and fluidly use
screeners to find new positions as the morning develops.

Before the market opens, you want to see a high premarket gap to create
significant opening volatility. These breakouts serve as catalysts as
more market players enter nine-to-noon stocks and turn them into morning
high-fliers. These are the stocks where money quickly flows in and out
of the order book as trading intensifies following large gains.
Fundamentals are completely thrown out the window here as you focus
solely on technical analysis. Screen for stocks:

-   Priced between \$0.20 and \$20,

-   With a daily gain of at least ten percent, and

-   With high volume (relative to when you look at the
    screener).[âµ]{.mark}

[Note that, if you use Yahoo Finance's screener, you will have to
constantly update the page and re-filter by highest percent gain to find
newfound gaining morning stocks.]{.mark}

[Be especially careful with cheap stocks under \$2 and only look for
very quality stocks with enough volume to support a day trade, as these
stocks tend to have the least volatility and highest spreads unless the
market pays particular attention to them one day because of surreal
gains and potential trades.]{.mark}

[This price range is a general average of stocks that trade well through
technical analysis since they correlate to lower floats and faster price
movements thanks to increased volatility and momentum.âµ These stocks
also much more easily move due to catalysts and premarket trading
activity in general.âµ High-priced stocks outside of this daily movement
range may present good trades, but they often simply stay flat after an
initial run-up throughout the day since they are more difficult to move
because of often-higher floats.]{.mark}

[As for percent gains, ten percent may sound high, but this movement is
easily attained by tons of nine-to-noon stocks every trading day. High
initial run-ups are crucial for trading because they put investors'
spotlights on a stock that can be further traded using technical
analysis for gains. High initial percent gains, especially before the
market even opens, also shows that the underlying stock can move
quickly, a great quality as you try to get in and out of technical
trades in a matter of minutes. (In a boring day with few movers you may
lower this figure to five percent in hopes of finding an early-morning
setup. There will be slow days in the market, but you have to trade
constantly to capture the largest gains when a stock suddenly goes from
\$2 to \$6.)]{.mark}

[When you run your stock screener, sort the results by largest daily
percent gains. These stocks are the most likely to move because they
have the highest initial momentum. Additionally, high percentage gains
can correlate to low floats since the limited supply of sellers quickly
gets purchased. Low floats help you make consistent profits as you time
price movements using technical analysis as long as there is enough
volume to support active trading. It is difficult to quantify a
"perfect" volume level because markets quickly increase in daily volume
as nine-to-noon stocks take off. Look for volume that is high compared
to the other stocks in your screener. The higher the volume, the better.
Note that average volume in nine-to-noon stocks rarely helps you predict
the volume influx after a large premarket gain. Here is an example on a
recent mover, MICT, Inc.:]{.mark}

![](media/image128.jpg){width="4.75in" height="2.28in"}

[â¶]{.mark}

[Clearly, the average 130,000 or so shares exchanged dwindles compared
to the almost 10,000,000 traded on this single day, especially
considering that \$MICT's float is around 6,550,00 shares.â·]{.mark}

[The best way to scan for nine-to-noon stocks is with live data through
a broker-provided screener. With live data, you will see gaining stocks
as soon as possible, ready to load up a chart and analyze a potential
trade. Yahoo Finance tries its best to get accurate data quickly, but
the site sometimes slightly lags behind the market. Additionally, Yahoo
Finance does not display live premarket data in screeners.Â² See if your
broker's stock screeners record premarket changes. Premarket gainers
between \$0.20 and \$20 are nine-to-noon stocks.]{.mark}

[For simplicity's sake, you can use the Stock Market Watch's premarket
movers list. As of writing this book, this list is the first website
result when you look up "premarket gainers."â¹ This free, online scanner
shows you the top gaining and losing stocks, as shown below. It is the
perfect screener for finding nine-to-noon stocks at the beginning of the
trading workday.]{.mark}

![](media/image129.png){width="4.75in" height="3.05in"}

[â¸]{.mark}

[Although you might be tempted to buy top losing stocks, perhaps
thinking that they will bounce back up during the trading day, these
losing stocks generally maintain flat prices throughout the day just
like expensive stocks. Poor performance tends to repel investors,
whereas strong performance attracts them and fosters larger gains based
on technical analysis.]{.mark}

[As you look over the premarket gainers, only pay attention to the ones
with significant volume. In our photo above, we would focus on \$WATT
specifically since it is the only individual stock with high volume
("3x" indicates that \$DWT is a leveraged fund). Once the market opens,
try to find good trades on these stocks, perhaps buying as they break
the VWAP and selling as they shoot over the top of the Bollinger Bands.
Then, transition into your live screens provided by either your broker
or Yahoo Finance to find newfound daily gainers and potential trades.
Similar to before, look for high-volume gainers only, say above 250,000
shares intraday. In case you are curious, here is how \$WATT played out
after its initial run-up:]{.mark}

![](media/image130.png){width="4.75in" height="2.03in"}

[Â¹â°]{.mark}

[In a trade like this, try to buy when you see the stock clearly break
through the VWAP (lowest final line under the nine-period and
twenty-period moving averages). From the early-morning breakthrough
around \$6.06 after a large premarket gain, the stock continued to rise
up to \$7.94 at noon, as shown above (thirty-one percent gain before a
colossal rise to over \$9, as shown below). Take profits as you see fit
and try not to be too greedy. Bulls and bears make bank, but pigs go
broke.Â¹Â¹]{.mark}

![](media/image131.png){width="4.75in" height="2.04in"}

[Â¹â°]{.mark}

Not all premarket gainers will form perfect setups. Many prime
nine-to-noon stocks prove tough to trade. Simply move on and search for
better setups in the morning until you find stocks that work for you. As
you initially start trading, try focusing on one position at a time. If
your comfort level increases and you feel a need to grow, start working
with multiple stocks at a time when you see extremely strong setups in
different companies at the same time. Volatility explodes right after
the opening bell, and stocks can shoot up or crash down quickly. Learn
to find reversals and time your orders alongside moving averages and
VWAP. As time goes by, your trading will drastically improve with
experience. Keep your positions calculated and try to know exactly how
much you want each position to be worth. As you improve, you can
increase your average trade size, perhaps scaling in or scaling out as
prices move.

Stick with what you believe in for the long-term as long as you can
outperform the market since short-term losses may dwindle compared to
potential long-term gains. Otherwise, turn to indices and outperforming
funds. Long-term screeners and robotic investors based on technicals and
statistics rarely outperform human portfolio managers trading
nine-to-noon. Screeners give you options and open nine-to-noon stocks
for active trading. They also help you find technical swing trades and
may compliment your underlying fundamental long-term investments. If you
are interested in expanding your portfolio with actively-managed
outperforming stock trades, grow with nine-to-noon stocks and the
subsequent workday.

##  Navigating Brokerage Nuances for Strategic Execution

In this chapter, we\'re going to take a close look at the world of
centralized brokers, the traditional gatekeepers of the financial
markets. While they currently play an essential role, it\'s worth noting
that the landscape is ripe for transformation, especially with the
advent of blockchain technology.

But don\'t skip ahead just yet, as the information here isn\'t merely a
snapshot of today\'s conditions. The core principles about how to assess
and interact with broker-dealers are evergreen. They will offer you a
sturdy foundation, even as technological advancements introduce new
dynamics to the field. So, buckle up as we explore how to navigate this
integral part of your financial journey, and how to be prepared for what
the future might bring.

---

Ready to get into the markets? Investment brokers are your access point
to financial markets. These brokerages, regulated by the SEC, connect
asset buyers and sellers based on marketplace orders submitted by
investors.[Â¹ To understand how brokers hold your assets, let's explore
how stock ownership works in an Internet age.]{.mark}

[The oldest known stock certificate came from the Dutch East Indies
Company from Holland in 1606.Â³ Stocks started on paper, and you used to
physically exchange them with your broker. Today, you no longer have to
sign a piece of paper to trade stocks, but you can still specifically
request a company to send you a paper stock certificate.â´ You can sell
your old-time paper stock certificates by signing a transfer form for
the stock and notarizing it for a transfer agent or stockbroker to
liquidate.Â³]{.mark}

[Companies keep track of current bondholders and shareholders using
transfer agents and registrars.â¶ Companies use these records to record
changes in stock ownership, shareholders to pay dividends to, and
bondholders to pay interest. For your purposes, the registrar keeps
track of all outstanding shares as well as the number of shares owned by
each shareholder so there is an official record of your stock or bond
ownership (we will look more at how you are identified on these ledgers
soon).â¶ Bond registrars also record interest rates due so that your
debtor borrower knows exactly how much to pay you each year.â¶ Just as a
stock registrar updates when someone sells shares to another investor, a
bond registrar updates when someone sells their bond in the secondary
market.â·]{.mark}

[These ledges can be maintained by the underlying company or outsourced
to a third-party trust or bank.â¸ The constantly-updated lists contains
basic information like each shareholder's name, their address (used for
mailings annual reports, dividend checks, tax documents, and other
documents), how much stock you own, stock transfers, direct deposit
dividend addresses (if applicable), and other miscellaneous information
like physical certificate history and stock class.âµ Remember that
preferred stock often gets paid dividends first and may receive more
voting rights than common stock.Â¹â¶]{.mark}

[Since stock transfers are all electronic by default today, your name
can be in any company's transfer-agent book depending on how you
purchase stock. With direct registration, you buy stock directly from
the underlying company, and management sends all mailings and dividends
to your address.â¹ This form of registration is commonplace for direct
stock purchase plans and employee stock purchase plans in which you can
purchase direct company shares.Â¹â°]{.mark}

[To avoid brokerage fees, which we will further explore soon, you can
use direct-purchase plans from individual companies.Â¹â° Fees vary
depending on the corporation, but you will usually save cash thanks to
the extra time commitment to buy directly from a company (some
exceptions for extreme budget brokers. See comparison table coming
soon).Â¹Â² You can also purchase fractional company shares through direct
stock purchase plans as you start off if an expensive stock would
unbalance your portfolio.Â¹Â³ Most direct-purchase-plan companies also
allow you to automatically reinvest your dividends in dividend
reinvestment plans that promote long-term holding, capital appreciation,
dividend compounding, and overall growth.]{.mark}

[However, direct stock ownership, when available, comes with decreased
liquidity and control over your investments. Rather than instantly
buying or selling your shares on the market at any price you choose, you
must notify the underlying company that you want to buy or sell your
shares.Â¹Â¹ Then, the company will purchase or sell shares for the plan
along established intervals (like once a week) and at an average market
price (often VWAP or a high-low average from the previous trading
day).Â¹Â¹ Â¹â´]{.mark}

[If you are willing to put the time and energy into opening plans with a
diversified group of companies, you can use direct stock purchase
programs for long-term investing to decrease transaction fees, receive
direct corporate recognition, and reinvest dividends with fractional
shares. You can also order physical stock certificates through these
programs if you want nice, expensive wall art and do not mind a tedious
and fee-filled selling process on top of physical certificate security
against damage or theft.Â¹â¶ Most shareholders stick with online inventory
to streamline their investments. The process for selling physical shares
varies greatly depending on the underlying company or brokerage you buy
them from, but it is almost always slower and more expensive than
electronic fulfillment.]{.mark}

[It is much easier to simply hold all your stocks in one or two
brokerage accounts where you can purchase stock, have dividends
reinvested, and efficiently liquidate any position at your desired price
with custom order types (see Secret #19). For nine-to-noon trading,
brokerage accounts are an absolute necessity. For long-term investors,
these accounts streamline your portfolio in a central location and give
you access to companies without cheaper direct stock purchase plans or
dividend reinvestment plans. You will always want a brokerage account to
use their research tools, stock screeners, trading software, and access
to investment options such as options, currencies, futures, and of
course stocks.]{.mark}

[When you electronically send a market order to your broker, they
instantaneously determine the best way to route your order based on
available market prices. First, your broker looks at prices on exchange
order books.Â¹â· Then, the broker compares quotes prices to those of
third-party market makers, secondary-pool participants, and internalized
trades.Â¹â·]{.mark}

[Internalization occurs when your broker fills your order from an
inventory of stocks owned by the brokerage or from another buyer or
seller of the same stock at the brokerage.Â¹â¸ Your broker will only
internalize a trade when they can get a price at or better than the
market quote.Â¹â¹ Additionally, your broker has a duty to seek the best
execution path readily available for your market order.Â¹â¹ They will scan
the entire marketplace in a matter of microseconds to help determine the
best order route according to their algorithms.Â²Â³]{.mark}

[Most brokers initially try routing orders internally or through market
makers in secondary pools to avoid marginal exchange fees while still
filling you at market rates.Â¹â· A market maker is simply a firm that buys
and sells stock along the bid-ask spread to create a market for you.Â²Â¹
Many market makers pay your broker rebates for routing your order to
them through "payments for order flow" (we will discuss this more
soon).Â²â° Still, brokers must report the quality of executions on a
stock-by-stock basis and ensure investors get the best
execution.Â¹â¸]{.mark}

[Point being, your broker has many destination options to route your
order to besides actual exchanges, and they should automatically find
the best option for you and give you a quality fill. As you compare
firms, look at customer reviews and statistics about how often customer
orders get price improvements. Consider which broker will give you the
best fill possible. Any small amount of slippage can quickly add up over
time, especially as you start placing larger orders.]{.mark}

[Remember that order fill quality and payment for order flow (PFOF)
generally only change how your broker directs market orders, if they
direct them away from exchanges at all. To disclose their order-routing
rebates, SEC Rule 606 forces brokers to publicly report certain routing
and execution metrics in a standard 606 quarterly report.Â³Â² This reveals
exactly which exchanges the broker routes orders to and outlines their
rebate compensation from liquidity-providing market markers.]{.mark}

[Specifically for limit orders, your broker will most likely route your
order through an Electronics Communication Network (ECN) that
automatically matches buy and sell orders at specific prices.Â²â° These
electronic order books cut out market makers and let buyers and sellers
exchange directly. They work best with high market participation rates
providing seamless liquidity.Â³Â³ Your level 2 feed is made up of open ECN
orders, market makers that buy and sell when nobody else will, and
wholesalers who execute orders for online brokers and retail brokers.Â³â´
Remember that open but unfilled trades can be canceled at any time and
may serve as bait to slightly move a market up or down by spoofing other
investors with selling or buying pressure. Recent US crackdowns on
high-frequency traders have lowered spoofing risk in more stable
securities.Â³âµ]{.mark}

[According to a 2016 study by the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, 58 percent of trading occurs publically on exchange
order books.Â²Â² In the other 42 percent of trades, your order may be
routed to an OTC market maker, a dark-pool market maker, a hidden
exchange market, an internalization algorithm, a PFOF-sponsored market
maker, or an electronic communications network.Â²Â² By increasing
marketplace liquidity, market makers help you no matter where your order
actually executes by constantly buying and selling stocks to make a
market for your trade. The market maker buys the bid and sells the ask
in hopes of making a small profit while making a liquid market, as you
should when possible by entering trades through limit orders.Â²Â¹]{.mark}

[Dark pools were created to facilitate bulk trading outside of public
exchanges to minimize a market reaction to large trades before they
complete.Â²âµ Large investors can sell bulk lots of a stock, say a
1,000,000-share block, at a static price out of the market order books
and overview rather than individually selling many smaller lots.Â²â¶
Because buying and selling pressure moves stock prices, a large buy or
sell order in the public market could prove difficult as the market
reacts to such large orders. So, dark pools allow order fulfillment
initially unrecorded to the market with lower fees.Â²â¶ These transactions
are not immediately published on traditional public stock exchanges, and
pre-trade data (i.e. your order showing up in the level 2 quote box) is
completely unpublished.Â²â· After a trade occurs in the dark, it can take
up to one day for it to appear in the public order book.Â²â´ Unless you
are trading millions of shares, you broker will handle your trade
execution automatically, and dark-pool fulfillment will only be
automatically used to receive comparable fill prices from exchange order
books to lower transaction costs.]{.mark}

[Huge buy and sell orders from institutional trades can significantly
affect public perception of a stock's price, hence the creation of dark
pools to trade out of public sight. You can profit from dark-pool
transactions by watching for extremely large orders from hedge funds,
mutual funds, etc.Â²â´]{.mark}

[Many brokers such as Interactive Brokers, LightSpeed, and TradeStation
route orders through dark pools to buyers and sellers to efficiently
fulfill your trade at the best possible prices.Â²â¸ However, actually
viewing transactions that go through dark pools proves more difficult
since they are designed with opaque markets in mind. FINRA has recently
made large strides to increase marketplace transparency in dark pools by
committing to publish trading information from alternative trading
systems (dark pools and other off-exchange market makers) regarding all
Tier 1]{.mark} National-Market-System [Stocks on a two-week delayed
basis]{.mark} (terminology from Secret #33)[. All other stocks and OTC
trades are subject to standard traded reporting requirements and are
released two weeks following the Tier 1 release.Â³â° However, it is tough
to make informed swing trades based on two-week-old data.]{.mark}

[Currently, Charles Schwab and Lightspeed are the only two brokers out
of the many we will discuss soon that let you directly monitor large
dark-pool trades via their desktop trading platforms.Â²â´ Charles Schwab
uses their proprietary StreetSmart^Â®^ Edge software to deliver this
market depth through the "Block Trade Indicator."Â²â¹ Lightspeed also
displays the Block Trade Indicator through their Lightspeed Trader
desktop software.Â²â´ â´Â² Simply open an account with one of the brokerages
to access their software platform and data.]{.mark}

[As you configure your block trade indicator, set the window to show
orders with a minimum block size of say 500,000 shares.Â²â´ This will show
you orders from all exchanges exceeding 500,000 shares. You can further
specify your search by only displaying orders from dark-pool exchanges
(common dark-pool ticker ADFN) while removing other mainstream exchanges
(NYSE Arca, Bats^Â®^, etc.).Â²â´ If you want to spend more time analyzing
dark-pool orders for large buyers or sellers, you can add an additional
indicator showing block trades over 50,000 shares.Â²â´ Remember that these
indicators show all market trades by default, not just those for one
stock. The indicator also displays the time the trade was released to
the public and at what price it executed at.Â²â´ Large discrepancies
between huge dark-pool order prices and current market prices show that
a trade happened far before it was actually reported on exchange books
and transfer registrars. Note that the data does not tell you whether
the institutional trader bought or sold the underlying security.]{.mark}

[By analyzing dark-pool trade history and placing orders mimicking
institutional traders with massive accounts, you can find decent profits
in swing-trade setups.Â²â´ If you do not want to commit to nine-to-noon
trading, then you may consider this trading style. Nonetheless, the
methodology acts as a solid complement to your technical analysis and
can undoubtedly help you make a few strong swing trades each
year.]{.mark}

[The strategy with dark-pool trading involves three simple
steps:]{.mark}

1.  [Identify an abnormally large (say 1,000,000+ shares on a \$40
    stock, higher is better) trade]{.mark}

2.  [Wait for the last hour or so of trading for the day the order
    executed (or appears to have executed)]{.mark}

3.  [Determine if the stock will close above or below the massive
    dark-pool order price point]{.mark}

    a.  [If above: buy]{.mark}

    b.  [If below: shortÂ²â´]{.mark}

[This strategy assumes that people with lots of money (presumably fund
managers or perhaps corporate executives) know insider information or
otherwise non-public secrets.Â²â¶ Â³Â¹]{.mark}

[Here is an example with Energy Select Sector SPDR ETF using a
500,000-share block trade indicator. Notice that this fund is far out of
the normal nine-to-noon price range of \$0.20 to \$20.]{.mark}

![](media/image132.png){width="3.25in" height="2.33in"}

[Â²â´]{.mark}

[After this abnormally-large trade early in the morning, \$XLE continued
to tread down until around noon.]{.mark}Â²â´ [As shown below, the stock
closed at \$55.83. Since the stock closed above the dark-pool order, the
steps outlined above predict a future run-up. We predict that the large
order was a buy order, and this buying pressure was well-informed and
will squeeze the market up.Â²â´ The stop-loss on a dark-pool trade should
be slightly above (short position) or below (long position) the massive
order since that price is an established psychological level by some
large trader. Here is how \$XLE turned out after two weeks of
trading:]{.mark}

![](media/image133.png){width="4.75in" height="2.79in"}

[Â²â´]{.mark}

[If dark-pool trading fits into your time-tested written trading style,
you can access the aforementioned institutions' platforms and trading
data while still trading with another brokerage by simplifying opening a
small or empty account. We will look more at minimum account standing
and more with specific brokerages soon.]{.mark}

[Every stock trade no matter its execution destination must be reported
to a stock exchange to update the transfer agent and registrar so that
the underlying transfer agents can update shareholder information. In
the case of an off-exchange transaction, most reporting is sent to the
stock's home registration and Initial-Public-Offering exchange.Â¹â· In
traditional exchanges, this usually occurs within ninety seconds of a
transaction.Â²â´]{.mark}

[However, book registration with transfer agents and registrars slightly
differs when you purchase stock through your broker. Rather than your
name, address, etc. in a company\'s registrar, the stock, mostly for
simplicity's sake, is held in your broker's "street name."Â² Similar to
direct registration, you do not receive a physical stock certificate
when you buy stock through your broker who subsequently uses street-name
registration to identify itself as the security manager on your behalf.Â²
Your broker then simply keeps its own record of who owns what stock
while the underlying companies send all mail (physical and digital) such
as dividend payments and annual reports to your broker who subsequently
distributes dividends and mailed information to you.]{.mark}

[As we talked about in Secret #18, centralized clearinghouses act as a
middleman for futures and commodities. These clearinghouses collect
cash, maintenance margin, and underlying assets between anonymous buyers
and sellers and oversee the delivery of a contract at expiration date.Â³â¶
Your broker connects you to these contract clearinghouses alongside
options markets at central exchanges.Â³â¶ Â³â¸ Lastly, your broker connects
you to global, decentralized over-the-counter currency
exchanges.Â³â·]{.mark}

[As you analyze potential brokers to deal with, consider their order
fill quality. As we have seen, brokers have many different options for
routing orders. By getting the best fills possible, you will minimize
any unseen losses when you enter and exit a position. With that said, it
is particularly difficult to measure how well or poorly your broker
fulfills your orders since there is no common metric to identify order
quality. All your broker can do is look for potential price improvements
and either fill you or leave your order open if you submit a limit
order. Nonetheless, consider what online reviews say about your broker.
Especially once you start making larger orders, a couple of cents off
the bid-ask spread can add up over time just like any other fee.]{.mark}

[On top of fill quality, consider order speed. The faster your orders
get to the market, the better chance you have of being filled at the
price you see on your screen. With centralized investment markets,
high-frequency traders in thinly-traded stocks can place market-making
orders in the order book across different exchanges, fill a small
portion of your market order at the first exchange your order
electronically reaches, and then cancel the rest of their orders at
other exchanges before your order physically arrives by using high-speed
signals linked to the physical exchange data center so that you
unintentionally get worse fills when your order reaches the now
higher-priced order books microseconds later. Use a limit order when
possible to avoid this tactic.]{.mark}

[For nine-to-noon trading, especially consider what desktop trading
platform a broker includes. Since you will stare at this all morning, it
is important that the software works well for you and gives you all
pertinent trading information. A poorly organized, sluggish, or
otherwise unintuitive trading software can significantly hurt your
trading efficiency and returns. Your broker should also give you live
data feeds from all major exchanges. Check to see if you have to pay a
special live data fee for access to some markets (e.g. pink sheets) or
perhaps a software usage fee. These platform and data fees can be large
recurring monthly charges at some brokers, while they are included in
commissions for others.]{.mark}

[If you are only swing trading or making long-term investments, then an
active desktop trading platform matters less since you can simply use
Yahoo Finance alongside your brokerage. To link your brokerage to Yahoo
Finance, simply open any portfolio and press "Link Broker."Â³â¹ From here,
you can link any of the following brokerages (2018):]{.mark}

-   [Fidelity]{.mark}

-   [E\*Trade]{.mark}

-   [Coinbase]{.mark}

-   [Robinhood]{.mark}

-   [Just2Trade]{.mark}

-   [Ally Invest]{.mark}

-   [Interactive Brokers]{.mark}

-   [TradeStation]{.mark}

-   [Tradier]{.mark}

-   [DriveWealth-partnered applications]{.mark}

-   [TD Ameritrade]{.mark}

-   [Charles Schwab]{.mark}

-   [Vanguard]{.mark}

-   [Capital One (acquired by E\*Trade)Â³â¹]{.mark}

[This linking process is completely free from Yahoo Finance; you simply
pay your broker's commissions and fees.â´â° You can search for brokers
with lower fees if you use this service since you can worry less about
your trading platform and news feed as a less-active investor. With that
said, you can still use high-quality desktop software to streamline your
analysis. We will look at platforms soon.]{.mark}

Lastly, consider trading fees when you compare brokers. Aside from
trading software for active trading, commissions are arguably the most
important brokerage factor. How much your broker charges you to trade
directly affects how much cash you make for long-term and short-term
trading.

Most "full-service" brokers that offer you investment advice, education,
etc. charge commissions on a per-trade basis. However, you do not need
much help constructing a portfolio since you read this book and will
practice trading while you get used to the markets that can forge your
financial future. Therefore, you can avoid full-service brokers and opt
for more budget-friendly brokers that connect you to all trading markets
with minimal costs yet strong account management and customer support.

Many "discount" brokers offer both per-trade and per-share fee
structures. So, rather than paying X much per trade, you can pay X much
per share traded (often with a minimum cost). For active traders, this
cost structure almost always results in less commissions and higher
profitability. For long-term investing and swing trading, consider you
average order sizes. It might make much more sense to use a per-trade
commission structure if you make particularly large trades often or
trade extremely cheap stocks. Do the math to find out which fee
structure takes less money out of your pocket once you start trading and
determine your average position size based on average position values.

Note that per-share fee structures especially help for active trading
when you want to slowly scale in or out of a position. For example, you
could buy a stock at \$7, watch a giant run-up to \$9, and sell half
your position. Since you only sold half of your shares, you can hold the
rest if the price keeps climbing or sell the rest if momentum teeters
off.

You can use a ratio for this example, buying and selling different
amounts of stock as you slowly phase in or out of a position. How much
you do this depends greatly on your personal trading strategy and
risk-management mentality. Do you want to lock in maximum profits all at
once or wait to see what the market will do while you take some profits
off the table? Perhaps you want to sell half of your position once it
doubles to get your initial investment back. Your trading experience
will help you develop this mindset. A profit-taking-stop or
market-if-touched order can automatically help you take profits, but it
can also cut off future growth. Try to stay decisive, disciplined, and
researched for maximum profitability.

Either way, you often pay much less for your single or multi-part trades
on a cost-per-share basis because, for example, you pay the full
commission to buy 100 shares, pay around half to sell fifty, and then
pay the last half to sell the rest. Compared to an X-dollar trade plus
an X-dollar trade plus an X-dollar trade, this per-share structure can
bring your commissions down to a fraction of comparable fees.

Here is a comprehensive table to compare a long list of major US
brokerages ranked from highest to lowest commissions. This list looks
only at equity-trade costs. Assume that options contracts and other
asset classes follow similar pricing trends for each broker. Each broker
is assumed to trade stocks, options, mutual funds, ETFs, foreign
currency exchanges, futures contracts, and bonds. Many of the brokers
below offer commission-free ETFs. The nature of these offers alongside
the quality of the underlying funds changes frequently. â´â·

Though it is hard to judge order execution, a recent, well-developed
study found that Fidelity, Interactive Brokers, Charles Schwab,
Tradestation, and Merrill Edge were ranked the top five brokerages by
order execution quality (best to worst).Â³Â²

+:-----------:+:-----------:+:-----------:+:-----------:+:-----------:+
| US Brokers  |             |             |             |             |
| (2018)      |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Name        | Trading     | Per-Trade   | Per-Share   | Minimum     |
|             | Platform    | Fee         | Fee         | Balance     |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| T. Rowe     | Online and  | \$19.95     | N           | \$2,500     |
| Price       | mobile      | base rate.  |             | (\$1,000    |
|             | platforms   |             |             | for IRAs)   |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| \$9.95      |             |             |             |             |
| trades if   |             |             |             |             |
| you make    |             |             |             |             |
| over 30     |             |             |             |             |
| trades per  |             |             |             |             |
| year or     |             |             |             |             |
| have over   |             |             |             |             |
| \$250,000   |             |             |             |             |
| in your     |             |             |             |             |
| account.    |             |             |             |             |
| 2,800       |             |             |             |             |
| comm        |             |             |             |             |
| ission-free |             |             |             |             |
| mutual      |             |             |             |             |
| funds. \$35 |             |             |             |             |
| commission  |             |             |             |             |
| for other   |             |             |             |             |
| mutual      |             |             |             |             |
| funds. \$30 |             |             |             |             |
| annual fee  |             |             |             |             |
| (waivable   |             |             |             |             |
| with enough |             |             |             |             |
| activity or |             |             |             |             |
| account     |             |             |             |             |
| value).     |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| USAA        | Limited     | \$8.95      | N           | \$3,000     |
|             | website and |             |             |             |
|             | mobile      |             |             |             |
|             | platforms   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Additional  |             |             |             |             |
| \$0.01      |             |             |             |             |
| charge per  |             |             |             |             |
| share for   |             |             |             |             |
| stocks      |             |             |             |             |
| under \$1.  |             |             |             |             |
| Comm        |             |             |             |             |
| ission-free |             |             |             |             |
| ETFs and    |             |             |             |             |
| mutual      |             |             |             |             |
| funds.      |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Vanguard    | Online      | \$7 for     | N           | \$0         |
|             | platform    | first 25    |             |             |
|             |             | trades;     |             |             |
|             |             | \$20 after  |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes: \$20 |             |             |             |             |
| annual fee  |             |             |             |             |
| until       |             |             |             |             |
| account     |             |             |             |             |
| grows over  |             |             |             |             |
| \$10,000.   |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Merrill     | Online and  | \$6.95      | N           | \$0         |
| Edge        | Merrill     |             |             |             |
|             | Edge Market |             |             |             |
|             | Pro         |             |             |             |
|             | platforms   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes: 30   |             |             |             |             |
| free trades |             |             |             |             |
| per month   |             |             |             |             |
| for         |             |             |             |             |
| Platinum    |             |             |             |             |
| tier        |             |             |             |             |
| clients and |             |             |             |             |
| 100 free    |             |             |             |             |
| trades per  |             |             |             |             |
| month for   |             |             |             |             |
| Platinum    |             |             |             |             |
| Honors tier |             |             |             |             |
| clients at  |             |             |             |             |
| Bank of     |             |             |             |             |
| America.    |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| TD          | Web,        | \$6.95      | N           | \$0         |
| Ameritrade  | mobile, and |             |             |             |
|             | thinkorswim |             |             |             |
|             | platforms   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Comm        |             |             |             |             |
| ission-free |             |             |             |             |
| ETFs.       |             |             |             |             |
| Twent       |             |             |             |             |
| y-four-hour |             |             |             |             |
| trading     |             |             |             |             |
| from Sunday |             |             |             |             |
| at 8 PM EST |             |             |             |             |
| to Friday   |             |             |             |             |
| at 8 PM     |             |             |             |             |
| EST.        |             |             |             |             |
| Advertised  |             |             |             |             |
| high        |             |             |             |             |
| order-      |             |             |             |             |
| fulfillment |             |             |             |             |
| quality and |             |             |             |             |
| fast        |             |             |             |             |
| execution   |             |             |             |             |
| times.      |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| E\*TRADE    | Power       | \$6.95      | N           | \$500       |
|             | E\*TRADE,   | (\$4.95     |             |             |
|             | E\*TRADE    | with 30 or  |             |             |
|             | Desktop,    | more trades |             |             |
|             | and mobile  | per         |             |             |
|             | platforms   | quarter)    |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Minimum     |             |             |             |             |
| \$1,000     |             |             |             |             |
| account     |             |             |             |             |
| value for   |             |             |             |             |
| real-time   |             |             |             |             |
| platform    |             |             |             |             |
| quotes.     |             |             |             |             |
| \$99        |             |             |             |             |
| platform    |             |             |             |             |
| fee for     |             |             |             |             |
| older       |             |             |             |             |
| E\*TRADE    |             |             |             |             |
| Pro         |             |             |             |             |
| Platform.   |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Wells Fargo | Online and  | \$5.95      | N           | \$25        |
| We          | mobile      |             |             |             |
| llsTrade^Â®^ | platforms   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| \$2.95      |             |             |             |             |
| trades when |             |             |             |             |
| linked to   |             |             |             |             |
| your        |             |             |             |             |
| Portfolio   |             |             |             |             |
| by Wells    |             |             |             |             |
| Fargo^Â®^.   |             |             |             |             |
| Greater of  |             |             |             |             |
| \$34.95 or  |             |             |             |             |
| 3.5 percent |             |             |             |             |
| of trade    |             |             |             |             |
| value       |             |             |             |             |
| commission  |             |             |             |             |
| for stocks  |             |             |             |             |
| under \$1   |             |             |             |             |
| per share.  |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Charles     | Web,        | \$4.95      | N           | \$0         |
| Schwab      | mobile, and |             |             |             |
|             | StreetSmart |             |             |             |
|             | Edge^Â®^     |             |             |             |
|             | platforms   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Comm        |             |             |             |             |
| ission-free |             |             |             |             |
| ETFs.       |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Ally Invest | Ally Invest | \$4.95      | N           | \$0         |
|             | LIVE        | (lowerable  |             |             |
|             | desktop     | to \$3.95   |             |             |
|             | platform    | with 30 or  |             |             |
|             | and mobile  | more        |             |             |
|             | platforms   | quarterly   |             |             |
|             |             | trades or   |             |             |
|             |             | \$100,000   |             |             |
|             |             | daily       |             |             |
|             |             | balance)    |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Additional  |             |             |             |             |
| \$0.01      |             |             |             |             |
| per-share   |             |             |             |             |
| charge up   |             |             |             |             |
| to five     |             |             |             |             |
| percent of  |             |             |             |             |
| trade value |             |             |             |             |
| for stocks  |             |             |             |             |
| under \$2   |             |             |             |             |
| per share.  |             |             |             |             |
| A           |             |             |             |             |
| dditionally |             |             |             |             |
| fees for    |             |             |             |             |
| other       |             |             |             |             |
| assets.     |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Fidelity    | Active      | \$4.95      | N           | \$0         |
|             | Trader      |             |             |             |
|             | Pro^Â®^,     |             |             |             |
|             | stock       |             |             |             |
|             | screener,   |             |             |             |
|             | website,    |             |             |             |
|             | and mobile  |             |             |             |
|             | platforms   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Comm        |             |             |             |             |
| ission-free |             |             |             |             |
| ETFs and    |             |             |             |             |
| zero-ex     |             |             |             |             |
| pense-ratio |             |             |             |             |
| index       |             |             |             |             |
| mutual      |             |             |             |             |
| funds with  |             |             |             |             |
| no          |             |             |             |             |
| investment  |             |             |             |             |
| minimums.   |             |             |             |             |
| No IRA      |             |             |             |             |
| fees. No    |             |             |             |             |
| data fees.  |             |             |             |             |
| Planning,   |             |             |             |             |
| advice,     |             |             |             |             |
| news,       |             |             |             |             |
| research,   |             |             |             |             |
| and         |             |             |             |             |
| education.  |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Trade       | Desktop,    | \$5 (see    | \$0.01      | \$500       |
| Station     | mobile,     | notes)      | (min. \$1)  |             |
|             | online, and |             | and \$0.006 |             |
|             | dedicated   |             | after the   |             |
|             | scanner     |             | first 500   |             |
|             | platforms   |             | shares per  |             |
|             |             |             | trade       |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes: Must |             |             |             |             |
| place at    |             |             |             |             |
| least five  |             |             |             |             |
| trades per  |             |             |             |             |
| year or     |             |             |             |             |
| maintain a  |             |             |             |             |
| minimum     |             |             |             |             |
| account     |             |             |             |             |
| balance of  |             |             |             |             |
| \$2,000 to  |             |             |             |             |
| avoid a     |             |             |             |             |
| \$50 annual |             |             |             |             |
| charge.     |             |             |             |             |
| Additional  |             |             |             |             |
| \$0.004     |             |             |             |             |
| charge per  |             |             |             |             |
| share for   |             |             |             |             |
| directly    |             |             |             |             |
| routed      |             |             |             |             |
| orders.     |             |             |             |             |
| Bond and    |             |             |             |             |
| mutual fund |             |             |             |             |
| fees start  |             |             |             |             |
| at \$14.95  |             |             |             |             |
| per trade   |             |             |             |             |
| plus \$5    |             |             |             |             |
| per bond.   |             |             |             |             |
| For         |             |             |             |             |
| per-share   |             |             |             |             |
| pricing     |             |             |             |             |
| structure   |             |             |             |             |
| e           |             |             |             |             |
| xclusively, |             |             |             |             |
| there is a  |             |             |             |             |
| \$99.95     |             |             |             |             |
| monthly     |             |             |             |             |
| maintenance |             |             |             |             |
| fee and a   |             |             |             |             |
| \$99.95     |             |             |             |             |
| monthly     |             |             |             |             |
| platform    |             |             |             |             |
| fee unless  |             |             |             |             |
| you trade   |             |             |             |             |
| 5000        |             |             |             |             |
| shares,     |             |             |             |             |
| trade fifty |             |             |             |             |
| contracts,  |             |             |             |             |
| or maintain |             |             |             |             |
| a \$100,000 |             |             |             |             |
| balance.    |             |             |             |             |
| Full data   |             |             |             |             |
| quotes cost |             |             |             |             |
| about \$50  |             |             |             |             |
| per month   |             |             |             |             |
| depending   |             |             |             |             |
| on your     |             |             |             |             |
| plan. \$50  |             |             |             |             |
| Treasury    |             |             |             |             |
| trading     |             |             |             |             |
| fee.        |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| SogoTrade   | SogoTrader  | \$4.88 base | N           | \$0 but     |
|             | Desktop,    | rate.       |             | cannot      |
|             |             | \$2.88 if   |             | trade       |
|             | SogoElite,  | you execute |             | stocks      |
|             | options,    | at least    |             | under \$1   |
|             | online, and | fifty       |             | without     |
|             | mobile      | trades per  |             | \$100       |
|             | platforms   | month.      |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Prepay your |             |             |             |             |
| commissions |             |             |             |             |
| for \$3.88  |             |             |             |             |
| or \$2.88   |             |             |             |             |
| per trade   |             |             |             |             |
| depending   |             |             |             |             |
| on the      |             |             |             |             |
| number of   |             |             |             |             |
| trades. For |             |             |             |             |
| stocks      |             |             |             |             |
| under \$1,  |             |             |             |             |
| add the     |             |             |             |             |
| greater of  |             |             |             |             |
| \$0.0003    |             |             |             |             |
| per share   |             |             |             |             |
| (ten        |             |             |             |             |
| percent of  |             |             |             |             |
| principal   |             |             |             |             |
| maximum) or |             |             |             |             |
| 0.25        |             |             |             |             |
| percent of  |             |             |             |             |
| principal.  |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Tradier     | See notes   | \$3.49      | N           | \$0         |
|             | for         |             |             |             |
|             | extensive   |             |             |             |
|             | list of     |             |             |             |
|             | supported   |             |             |             |
|             | platforms   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Partnered   |             |             |             |             |
| platforms   |             |             |             |             |
| include     |             |             |             |             |
| eSignal,    |             |             |             |             |
| 1Option,    |             |             |             |             |
| Evati,      |             |             |             |             |
| St          |             |             |             |             |
| ockcircles, |             |             |             |             |
| Jellifin,   |             |             |             |             |
| Be          |             |             |             |             |
| tterTrader, |             |             |             |             |
| Sc          |             |             |             |             |
| reenulator, |             |             |             |             |
| OptionNET   |             |             |             |             |
| Explorer,   |             |             |             |             |
| Fin         |             |             |             |             |
| anceBoards, |             |             |             |             |
| Ablesys,    |             |             |             |             |
| OptionVue,  |             |             |             |             |
| Option      |             |             |             |             |
| Samurai,    |             |             |             |             |
| Ensign      |             |             |             |             |
| Software,   |             |             |             |             |
| TradeHawk,  |             |             |             |             |
| Equities    |             |             |             |             |
| Lab,        |             |             |             |             |
| Dynamic     |             |             |             |             |
| Trend,      |             |             |             |             |
| Investfly,  |             |             |             |             |
| Scutify,    |             |             |             |             |
| Global      |             |             |             |             |
| A           |             |             |             |             |
| utotrading, |             |             |             |             |
| MotiveWave, |             |             |             |             |
| Trade It,   |             |             |             |             |
| ionDesk,    |             |             |             |             |
| Elsen       |             |             |             |             |
| Trading,    |             |             |             |             |
| S           |             |             |             |             |
| creener.co, |             |             |             |             |
| Technician  |             |             |             |             |
| by          |             |             |             |             |
| ChartIQ^Â®^, |             |             |             |             |
| Form        |             |             |             |             |
| 8949.com,   |             |             |             |             |
| Magenta     |             |             |             |             |
| Trader,     |             |             |             |             |
| Lucid       |             |             |             |             |
| Trend,      |             |             |             |             |
| Quantcha,   |             |             |             |             |
| Medved      |             |             |             |             |
| Trader, and |             |             |             |             |
| TradeSharp. |             |             |             |             |
| Platform    |             |             |             |             |
| fees vary   |             |             |             |             |
| depending   |             |             |             |             |
| on your     |             |             |             |             |
| provider.   |             |             |             |             |
| No penny    |             |             |             |             |
| stock       |             |             |             |             |
| trading.    |             |             |             |             |
| \$30 annual |             |             |             |             |
| IRA fee.    |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| eOption     | eOption     | \$3         | N           | \$500       |
|             | Trader      |             |             |             |
|             | Desktop,    |             |             |             |
|             | website,    |             |             |             |
|             | options,    |             |             |             |
|             | and mobile  |             |             |             |
|             | platforms   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Offers an   |             |             |             |             |
| "au         |             |             |             |             |
| to-trading" |             |             |             |             |
| robot       |             |             |             |             |
| ic-advising |             |             |             |             |
| service     |             |             |             |             |
| with \$5    |             |             |             |             |
| c           |             |             |             |             |
| ommissions. |             |             |             |             |
| \$15 annual |             |             |             |             |
| IRA fee.    |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Tastyworks  | Tastyworks  | \$5 for     | N           | \$0         |
|             | Desktop,    | opening     |             |             |
|             | mobile, and | order and   | Add minimal |             |
|             | browser     | \$0 for     | clearing    |             |
|             | platforms   | closing     | fees to all |             |
|             |             | order       | trades      |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Especially  |             |             |             |             |
| low options |             |             |             |             |
| commissions |             |             |             |             |
| with        |             |             |             |             |
| similar \$0 |             |             |             |             |
| closing     |             |             |             |             |
| trade plus  |             |             |             |             |
| clearing    |             |             |             |             |
| fees.       |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Place Trade | Place       | N           | \$0.01      | \$0         |
| Financial   | Trader      |             | (min.       |             |
|             | W           | Add minimal | \$1.50)     |             |
|             | orkstation, | routing and | (max. one   |             |
|             | website,    | regulatory  | percent of  |             |
|             | and mobile  | fees to all | trade       |             |
|             | platforms   | trades      | value)      |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes: Same |             |             |             |             |
| inactivity  |             |             |             |             |
| fee         |             |             |             |             |
| structure   |             |             |             |             |
| as          |             |             |             |             |
| Interactive |             |             |             |             |
| Brokers     |             |             |             |             |
| (\$3 for    |             |             |             |             |
| clients     |             |             |             |             |
| under 25)   |             |             |             |             |
| (fee waived |             |             |             |             |
| for first   |             |             |             |             |
| three       |             |             |             |             |
| months at   |             |             |             |             |
| both        |             |             |             |             |
| b           |             |             |             |             |
| rokerages). |             |             |             |             |
| \$10 live   |             |             |             |             |
| monthly     |             |             |             |             |
| data fee    |             |             |             |             |
| (waived if  |             |             |             |             |
| over \$30   |             |             |             |             |
| in trades). |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Lightspeed  | Lightspeed  | \$4.50      | \$0.0045    | \$25,000    |
|             | Trader,     |             |             | (\$10,000   |
|             | Sterling    | Additional  | default     | if you only |
|             | Trader,     | \$0.003 per |             | use Web     |
|             | Livevol^Â®^  | share fee   | (min. \$1)  | Trader      |
|             | X, RealTick | for all pre |             | platform)   |
|             | Pro,        | and         | \$0.0065 if | (\$35       |
|             | online, and | post-market | you use     | annual fee  |
|             | mobile      | orders      | Livevol X   | for IRAs)   |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             |             |             | (min.       |             |
|             |             |             | \$1.50)     |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Lightspeed  |             |             |             |             |
| Trader      |             |             |             |             |
| Desktop     |             |             |             |             |
| platform    |             |             |             |             |
| costs \$130 |             |             |             |             |
| per month   |             |             |             |             |
| minus       |             |             |             |             |
| generated   |             |             |             |             |
| c           |             |             |             |             |
| ommissions. |             |             |             |             |
| All routing |             |             |             |             |
| f           |             |             |             |             |
| ees/rebates |             |             |             |             |
| and         |             |             |             |             |
| regulatory  |             |             |             |             |
| fees are    |             |             |             |             |
| charged     |             |             |             |             |
| separately. |             |             |             |             |
| You pay 0.3 |             |             |             |             |
| percent     |             |             |             |             |
| times the   |             |             |             |             |
| total trade |             |             |             |             |
| value for   |             |             |             |             |
| stocks      |             |             |             |             |
| under \$1.  |             |             |             |             |
| Minimum     |             |             |             |             |
| market-data |             |             |             |             |
| monthly     |             |             |             |             |
| fees around |             |             |             |             |
| \$10 for    |             |             |             |             |
| desktop     |             |             |             |             |
| platforms.  |             |             |             |             |
| Flat \$230  |             |             |             |             |
| to \$260    |             |             |             |             |
| monthly fee |             |             |             |             |
| for         |             |             |             |             |
| Sterling    |             |             |             |             |
| Trader.     |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Cobra       | Cobra       | N           | \$0.004     | \$30,000    |
| Trading     | TraderPro,  |             | (min. \$1)  |             |
|             | DAS Trader  | Add         |             |             |
|             | Pro,        | higher-t    |             |             |
|             | Sterling    | han-average |             |             |
|             | Trader Pro, | platfor     |             |             |
|             | and mobile  | m-dependent |             |             |
|             | platforms   | routing and |             |             |
|             |             | regulatory  |             |             |
|             |             | fees to all |             |             |
|             |             | trades      |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Basic data  |             |             |             |             |
| fees start  |             |             |             |             |
| at \$25.    |             |             |             |             |
| Monthly     |             |             |             |             |
| platform    |             |             |             |             |
| fees start  |             |             |             |             |
| at \$100    |             |             |             |             |
| (waivable   |             |             |             |             |
| for traders |             |             |             |             |
| with        |             |             |             |             |
| 200,000 or  |             |             |             |             |
| more shares |             |             |             |             |
| exchanged   |             |             |             |             |
| per month). |             |             |             |             |
| \$35 annual |             |             |             |             |
| IRA fee.    |             |             |             |             |
| \$15        |             |             |             |             |
| quarterly   |             |             |             |             |
| inactivity  |             |             |             |             |
| fee (must   |             |             |             |             |
| make one    |             |             |             |             |
| trade).     |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| CenterPoint | Centerpoint | \$5.95 plus | \$0.004     | \$30,000    |
| Securities  | Trader,     | minimal     | (min.       |             |
|             | Sterling    | routing and | \$0.95)     |             |
|             | Trader^Â®^   | regulatory  |             |             |
|             | Pro, and    | fees        |             |             |
|             | DAS Trader  |             |             |             |
|             | Pro         |             |             |             |
|             | platforms   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes: High |             |             |             |             |
| platform    |             |             |             |             |
| and data    |             |             |             |             |
| fees, but   |             |             |             |             |
| some fees   |             |             |             |             |
| can be      |             |             |             |             |
| waived.     |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Interactive | Flagship    | N           | \$0.0035    | \$0 for     |
| Brokers     | Desktop     |             | (min.       | cash        |
|             | TWS,        |             | \$0.35)     | account or  |
|             | mobile,     |             | (max. one   | \$2,000 for |
|             | online, and |             | percent of  | margin      |
|             | messenger   |             | trade       | (\$2,000    |
|             | platforms   |             | value)      | required    |
|             |             |             |             | for live    |
|             |             |             |             | data)       |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Minimum     |             |             |             |             |
| \$10 in     |             |             |             |             |
| commissions |             |             |             |             |
| per month   |             |             |             |             |
| or cover    |             |             |             |             |
| the         |             |             |             |             |
| difference  |             |             |             |             |
| (\$20 if    |             |             |             |             |
| average     |             |             |             |             |
| account     |             |             |             |             |
| value under |             |             |             |             |
| \$2,000)    |             |             |             |             |
| (lower      |             |             |             |             |
| minimum for |             |             |             |             |
| different   |             |             |             |             |
| account     |             |             |             |             |
| types or    |             |             |             |             |
| ages under  |             |             |             |             |
| 25) (waived |             |             |             |             |
| if account  |             |             |             |             |
| value is at |             |             |             |             |
| least       |             |             |             |             |
| \$100,000). |             |             |             |             |
| Comm        |             |             |             |             |
| ission-free |             |             |             |             |
| ETFs.       |             |             |             |             |
| Extensive   |             |             |             |             |
| list of     |             |             |             |             |
| free        |             |             |             |             |
| research    |             |             |             |             |
| and news    |             |             |             |             |
| plat        |             |             |             |             |
| forms.[^6^Â¹ |             |             |             |             |
| Free        |             |             |             |             |
| educational |             |             |             |             |
| content and |             |             |             |             |
| passive     |             |             |             |             |
| robo        |             |             |             |             |
| -advisors.^ |             |             |             |             |
| 66^]{.mark} |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Just2Trade  | Just2Trade  | \$2.50      | \$0.0025    | Fees        |
|             | Desktop,    | (\$12.50    | (min.       | increase    |
|             | Sterling    | mutual      | \$0.50)     | under       |
|             | Trader Pro, | funds)      |             | \$2,500.    |
|             | Etna        | (\$75       |             | Cannot      |
|             | Trading     | foreign     |             | trade with  |
|             | Platform,   | stock fee)  |             | under       |
|             | website,    |             |             | \$2,000.    |
|             | and mobile  | For all     |             | Must have   |
|             | platforms   | orders, add |             | \$25,000    |
|             |             | routing and |             | for         |
|             |             | regulatory  |             | per-share   |
|             |             | fees        |             | pricing     |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Minimal     |             |             |             |             |
| per-share   |             |             |             |             |
| monthly     |             |             |             |             |
| commissions |             |             |             |             |
| are \$333   |             |             |             |             |
| (you pay    |             |             |             |             |
| the         |             |             |             |             |
| difference  |             |             |             |             |
| like with   |             |             |             |             |
| Interactive |             |             |             |             |
| Brokers).   |             |             |             |             |
| Additional  |             |             |             |             |
| \$0.003 per |             |             |             |             |
| share fee   |             |             |             |             |
| for pre and |             |             |             |             |
| post-market |             |             |             |             |
| trading.    |             |             |             |             |
| Special     |             |             |             |             |
| trading     |             |             |             |             |
| rates       |             |             |             |             |
| available   |             |             |             |             |
| for         |             |             |             |             |
| broker      |             |             |             |             |
| -registered |             |             |             |             |
| active      |             |             |             |             |
| traders.    |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Choice      | Quotestream | \$0 with a  | N           | \$100       |
| Trade       | Trader Pro, | \$5 monthly |             |             |
|             | Direct      | fee or \$5  | OTC trades  |             |
|             | ProTrader,  | per trade.  | are \$7     |             |
|             | ChoiceTrade | Trades on   | plus        |             |
|             | Elite       | stocks      | routing     |             |
|             | Trader,     | under \$1   | fees        |             |
|             | website,    | are \$5     |             |             |
|             | and mobile  | regardless  |             |             |
|             | platforms   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes: Pre  |             |             |             |             |
| and         |             |             |             |             |
| post-market |             |             |             |             |
| trades add  |             |             |             |             |
| \$0.005 per |             |             |             |             |
| share.      |             |             |             |             |
| Desktop     |             |             |             |             |
| platform    |             |             |             |             |
| fees range  |             |             |             |             |
| from \$15   |             |             |             |             |
| to \$135 a  |             |             |             |             |
| month.      |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Folio       | Website     | \$0 for     | N           | \$0         |
|             | platform    | first 2,000 |             |             |
|             | and basic   | orders if   |             |             |
|             | screener    | you         |             |             |
|             | platforms   | subscribe.  |             |             |
|             |             | \$4 in      |             |             |
|             |             | "trading    |             |             |
|             |             | windows"    |             |             |
|             |             | otherwise   |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Subscribe   |             |             |             |             |
| for \$29    |             |             |             |             |
| per month   |             |             |             |             |
| or \$290    |             |             |             |             |
| per year if |             |             |             |             |
| you pay in  |             |             |             |             |
| bulk.       |             |             |             |             |
| Orders      |             |             |             |             |
| execute     |             |             |             |             |
| around 11   |             |             |             |             |
| AM and 2 PM |             |             |             |             |
| EST at      |             |             |             |             |
| market. Any |             |             |             |             |
| specificall |             |             |             |             |
| y-requested |             |             |             |             |
| trades      |             |             |             |             |
| outside of  |             |             |             |             |
| the two     |             |             |             |             |
| trading     |             |             |             |             |
| windows is  |             |             |             |             |
| \$3 if      |             |             |             |             |
| subscribed  |             |             |             |             |
| or \$10 if  |             |             |             |             |
| not. If not |             |             |             |             |
| subscribed, |             |             |             |             |
| you must    |             |             |             |             |
| make over   |             |             |             |             |
| three       |             |             |             |             |
| trades per  |             |             |             |             |
| quarter to  |             |             |             |             |
| avoid an    |             |             |             |             |
| inactivity  |             |             |             |             |
| fee.        |             |             |             |             |
| Limited     |             |             |             |             |
| selection   |             |             |             |             |
| of premade  |             |             |             |             |
| but         |             |             |             |             |
| c           |             |             |             |             |
| ustomizable |             |             |             |             |
| diversified |             |             |             |             |
| portfolios. |             |             |             |             |
| Automatic   |             |             |             |             |
| portfolio   |             |             |             |             |
| r           |             |             |             |             |
| ebalancing. |             |             |             |             |
| Fractional  |             |             |             |             |
| shares      |             |             |             |             |
| available.  |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Betterment  | Website and | You do not  | N           | \$0 for     |
|             | mobile      | make direct |             | digital     |
|             | platforms   | trades (see |             | advising or |
|             |             | notes)      |             | \$100,000   |
|             |             |             |             | for premium |
|             |             |             |             | advising    |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| Betterment  |             |             |             |             |
| offers      |             |             |             |             |
| advising    |             |             |             |             |
| and places  |             |             |             |             |
| you in      |             |             |             |             |
| low-cost    |             |             |             |             |
| investment  |             |             |             |             |
| portfolios. |             |             |             |             |
| 0.25        |             |             |             |             |
| percent     |             |             |             |             |
| annual fee  |             |             |             |             |
| charged     |             |             |             |             |
| quarterly   |             |             |             |             |
| for digital |             |             |             |             |
| advising.   |             |             |             |             |
| 0.4 percent |             |             |             |             |
| for         |             |             |             |             |
| premium. No |             |             |             |             |
| trading or  |             |             |             |             |
| transfer    |             |             |             |             |
| fees on top |             |             |             |             |
| of annual   |             |             |             |             |
| fee.        |             |             |             |             |
| Automatic   |             |             |             |             |
| r           |             |             |             |             |
| ebalancing. |             |             |             |             |
| Easily      |             |             |             |             |
| adjust your |             |             |             |             |
| portfolio   |             |             |             |             |
| dive        |             |             |             |             |
| rsification |             |             |             |             |
| to meet     |             |             |             |             |
| savings and |             |             |             |             |
| retirement  |             |             |             |             |
| goals.      |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Ustocktrade | Web and     | \$1 plus    | N           | \$0         |
|             | mobile      | \$1 monthly |             |             |
|             | minimalist  | fee         |             |             |
|             | platforms   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes:      |             |             |             |             |
| 10,000      |             |             |             |             |
| share and   |             |             |             |             |
| \$10,000    |             |             |             |             |
| order buy   |             |             |             |             |
| value       |             |             |             |             |
| limits. Has |             |             |             |             |
| level 2     |             |             |             |             |
| quotes.     |             |             |             |             |
| Stocks and  |             |             |             |             |
| ETFs only.  |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Stockpile   | Web and     | \$0.99      | N           | \$0         |
|             | mobile      |             |             |             |
|             | minimalist  |             |             |             |
|             | platforms   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes: Only |             |             |             |             |
| has market  |             |             |             |             |
| orders that |             |             |             |             |
| execute at  |             |             |             |             |
| the end of  |             |             |             |             |
| the day.    |             |             |             |             |
| Fractional  |             |             |             |             |
| shares      |             |             |             |             |
| available.  |             |             |             |             |
| Limited     |             |             |             |             |
| selection   |             |             |             |             |
| of only     |             |             |             |             |
| around 1000 |             |             |             |             |
| stocks,     |             |             |             |             |
| foreign     |             |             |             |             |
| companies   |             |             |             |             |
| through     |             |             |             |             |
| American    |             |             |             |             |
| holdings,   |             |             |             |             |
| and ETFs.   |             |             |             |             |
| No level 2. |             |             |             |             |
| Also offers |             |             |             |             |
| stock gift  |             |             |             |             |
| cards for   |             |             |             |             |
| additional  |             |             |             |             |
| fees.       |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Acorns      | Mobile      | \$0 (see    | N           | \$0         |
|             | platform    | notes)      |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes: \$1  |             |             |             |             |
| monthly     |             |             |             |             |
| fee. \$2 if |             |             |             |             |
| you want an |             |             |             |             |
| IRA. \$3 if |             |             |             |             |
| you want a  |             |             |             |             |
| checking    |             |             |             |             |
| account.    |             |             |             |             |
| You can     |             |             |             |             |
| only        |             |             |             |             |
| deposit     |             |             |             |             |
| your money  |             |             |             |             |
| to be       |             |             |             |             |
| au          |             |             |             |             |
| tomatically |             |             |             |             |
| invested    |             |             |             |             |
| into one of |             |             |             |             |
| Acorn's     |             |             |             |             |
| five        |             |             |             |             |
| prebuilt    |             |             |             |             |
| and         |             |             |             |             |
| u           |             |             |             |             |
| nchangeable |             |             |             |             |
| portfolios. |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| M1 Finance  | Online and  | \$0 plus    | N           | \$0         |
|             | mobile      | minimal     |             |             |
|             | platforms   | routing and | You do not  |             |
|             |             | regulatory  | usually     |             |
|             |             | fees        | directly    |             |
|             |             |             | trade       |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes: Uses |             |             |             |             |
| fractional  |             |             |             |             |
| shares. You |             |             |             |             |
| create      |             |             |             |             |
| cust        |             |             |             |             |
| om-weighted |             |             |             |             |
| portfolios, |             |             |             |             |
| and M1      |             |             |             |             |
| Finance     |             |             |             |             |
| au          |             |             |             |             |
| tomatically |             |             |             |             |
| balances    |             |             |             |             |
| and         |             |             |             |             |
| rebalances  |             |             |             |             |
| your        |             |             |             |             |
| deposits to |             |             |             |             |
| fit the     |             |             |             |             |
| percent     |             |             |             |             |
| allocations |             |             |             |             |
| of the      |             |             |             |             |
| underlying  |             |             |             |             |
| securities  |             |             |             |             |
| in your     |             |             |             |             |
| portfolio.  |             |             |             |             |
| You can     |             |             |             |             |
| s           |             |             |             |             |
| pecifically |             |             |             |             |
| request an  |             |             |             |             |
| order and   |             |             |             |             |
| it will     |             |             |             |             |
| execute     |             |             |             |             |
| like a      |             |             |             |             |
| normal free |             |             |             |             |
| rebalance.  |             |             |             |             |
| Trades      |             |             |             |             |
| execute at  |             |             |             |             |
| market      |             |             |             |             |
| around      |             |             |             |             |
| 10:00 AM    |             |             |             |             |
| EST.        |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Firstrade   | Firstrade   | \$0         | \$0         | \$0         |
|             | Navigator,  |             |             |             |
|             | Options     | (plus       | (fee        | \$0 pre and |
|             | Wizard,     | minimal     | includes    | post-market |
|             | website,    | routing and | mutual      | trading     |
|             | and mobile  | regulatory  | funds and   |             |
|             | platforms   | fees for    | options)    |             |
|             |             | all order   |             |             |
|             |             | types)      |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes: Free |             |             |             |             |
| options     |             |             |             |             |
| trading     |             |             |             |             |
| with        |             |             |             |             |
| \$14.95     |             |             |             |             |
| execution   |             |             |             |             |
| charge.     |             |             |             |             |
| Comm        |             |             |             |             |
| ission-free |             |             |             |             |
| ETFs. No    |             |             |             |             |
| IRA fees.   |             |             |             |             |
| No check or |             |             |             |             |
| electronic  |             |             |             |             |
| transfer    |             |             |             |             |
| fees. No    |             |             |             |             |
| data fees.  |             |             |             |             |
| Offers      |             |             |             |             |
| Coverdell   |             |             |             |             |
| ESAs.       |             |             |             |             |
| 0.1-second  |             |             |             |             |
| trade       |             |             |             |             |
| exe         |             |             |             |             |
| cution-time |             |             |             |             |
| guarantee.  |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Robinhood   | Online and  | \$0         | \$0         | \$0         |
|             | mobile      |             |             |             |
|             | minimalist  |             |             |             |
|             | platforms   |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Notes: Free |             |             |             |             |
| options     |             |             |             |             |
| trading and |             |             |             |             |
| execution.  |             |             |             |             |
| Only broker |             |             |             |             |
| out of all  |             |             |             |             |
| brokers     |             |             |             |             |
| listed to   |             |             |             |             |
| not offer   |             |             |             |             |
| dividend    |             |             |             |             |
| r           |             |             |             |             |
| einvestment |             |             |             |             |
| (2018). No  |             |             |             |             |
| level 2.    |             |             |             |             |
| Ext         |             |             |             |             |
| ended-hours |             |             |             |             |
| trading     |             |             |             |             |
| with live   |             |             |             |             |
| prices.     |             |             |             |             |
| Only broker |             |             |             |             |
| listed that |             |             |             |             |
| does not    |             |             |             |             |
| allow you   |             |             |             |             |
| to short    |             |             |             |             |
| stocks      |             |             |             |             |
| (2018).[â´Â¹  |             |             |             |             |
| A]{         |             |             |             |             |
| .mark}llows |             |             |             |             |
| you to      |             |             |             |             |
| directly    |             |             |             |             |
| trade       |             |             |             |             |
| cryptocu    |             |             |             |             |
| rrencies.â´Â³ |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

^[44\ 45\ 46\ 48\ 49\ 50\ 51\ 52\ 53\ 54\ 55\ 56\ 57\ 58\ 59\ 60\ 62\ 63\ 64\ 65\ 67\ 68\ 69\ 70\ 71\ 72\ 73\ 74\ 75\ 76\ 77\ 78\ 79\ 80\ 81\ 82\ 83\ 84\ 85\ 86\ 87\ 88\ 89\ 90\ 91\ 92\ 93\ 94\ 95\ 96\ 97\ 98\ 99\ 100\ 101\ 102\ 103\ 104\ 105\ 106\ 107\ 108\ 109\ 110\ 111\ 112\ 113\ 114\ 116\ 117]{.mark}\ 118\ 119^
\*If multiple tiers of commission plans are available, the most basic
(lowest volume) tier was used. If you have significant trading volume,
explore tiered per-share rates from the lowest-cost per-share brokers to
find the best deal for you.

Other conditions apply. See current broker website for details or
promotions. Many large firms constantly offer free trades for signing
up, so you could get away with using a bigger broker during a "trial
period" and then moving to another, more affordable one after the
promotion ends. This also gives you many chances to try out different
charting software while you make free trades.

I highly recommend TD Ameritrade\'s thinkorswim platform for charting.
You can open an account and leave it sparsely funded to get access to
the platform and live data feeds. If you are a long-term investor or
swing trader, then you can use this platform for analysis alongside
Yahoo Finance while executing your trades and holding your positions in
a much cheaper broker like Robinhood or perhaps M1 Finance if you want
to spend less time managing your investments.

However, if you trade nine-to-noon, you will want a broker with both a
strong platform and a strong commission structure. Remember that you can
create separate accounts and isolate your active trading and long-term
investing. With a dedicated active broker, you can enter and exit
positions faster as you directly see them set up. Interactive Brokers
and Lightspeed work especially well with their desktop platform and low
fees. Explore the many platforms above ranging from DAS Trader to the
unmentioned Ninja Trader. You can link external software with your
broker, but it is much easier to use the provided desktop software to
ensure extremely fast order execution and live quotes, especially when
many trades end in fifteen minutes or less. Visual appeal with these
platforms is crucial, as you will stare at them every morning. Find a
platform that flows well with your trading to increase your productivity
while also operating with low fees. Not to mention, high-quality trading
platforms help you quickly scan through more and more potential setups.

If you are only investing for the long-term, consider how much time you
want to commit to your financial future. Some of the brokers above help
you manage your money for a small fee. Others simply give you access to
globally-leading index-fund-tracking ETFs for very low prices, notably
Fidelity with its zero-commission and zero-expense-ratio funds.
Otherwise, you can stick to the free Yahoo Finance analysis tools and
screeners we have explored to maximize your potential returns with
individual trades.

If you want to start trading actively but are still stuck under the PDT
rule, then you could get away with cheaper charting software since you
only have to make a few really good trades per week, and most live data
feeds will let you do this with a fairly-fast order entry box. However,
try to practice investing, especially as you first begin, as if you have
an account ten times larger than your current portfolio. With this
mentality, ten percent gains will, as they should, seem phenomenal with
long-term investments, and you will prepare yourself to manage your
future money when you do grow your account. By taking your trading
especially seriously, you will learn to master level 2 quotes and live
data through your broker's initially-complex desktop platform, a
platform that will serve as your gateway for future profits.

Many of the brokers above offer after-hours trading. Like we said
earlier, try to stick to market-hours trading to maximize volume and
minimize spreads. However, this feature can prove handy if you want to
make a quick trade based on news such as an earnings report. You can
never be certain where a stock will open the next day after the market
closes. For this reason, try not to buy stocks at market open with limit
orders generated the night before, as you may significantly overpay for
a stock that quickly tumbles the next day. Generally, early-morning
trading in all stock set securities up for a red or green (down or up)
trading days as most stocks collectively follow major market indices
each day.

Lastly, some of the brokers above advertise their "tax-efficiency" or
easy year-end accounting. Losses do cancel out gains with respect to
their trading time frames. However, I implore you to worry less about
taxes and more about making as much money as you possibly can. At the
end of the year, you can offset gains by selling losing stocks, but you
can also cut off future growth by closing out temporarily-down positions
that may outperform in the long run.

I give this warning from experience. In the earlier technical example
with \$AMD, I bought the stock as a fundamental play since I saw the
company growing. As I shared the position with investment friends, one
friend took a position at \$13 as \$AMD bounced around in a downward
wedge. At the end of that same year, this friend chose to sell their
position at a loss at \$11 to offset short-term gains, partially because
they knew little about the underlying business fundamentals. Was the tax
benefit worth the loss? Just a few short months later, the stock popped
out of a downward wedge to a long-term resistance over \$33 where I sold
half my shares.^115^ Make trades normally and your broker will send you
the necessary 1099s to pay the right amount of taxes. Nonetheless, still
remember tax laws. I sold my shares on the exact day I bought them the
year before, forcing the sale into the short-term capital gains tax
bracket. I could have eradicated my capital gains taxes by waiting just
one more day to exit the stock. Learn from your mistakes to strengthen
your trading.

##  Mind Over Markets --- Unlock the Ideal Trading Mentality

[That is all there is to *Nine to Noon*. It is a fairly calculated but
flexible workday. Some traders cut their active trading after a few
quick wins, hoping to keep their early profits for the day. Others
intentionally finish active trading quickly in order to pay more
attention to their long-term portfolios.]{.mark}

[No matter how any certain day plays out or how you balance your time,
most people can be successful in the long-term by trading nine-to-noon.
This shortened workday gives you just enough time to use your technical
analysis skills to make quick, unemotional, and larger trades in the
early morning while still leaving enough time at the end to manage and
amend long-term portfolios.]{.mark}

[The nine-to-noon grind is completely self-enforced. You have to love
the trading you do to keep up with it every market day. Consistent
profits come to traders because they commit to trading repetitively so
they can master the game. When you find a way to love trading, you open
yourself up to success in trading as long as you put in the
work.]{.mark}

[If the nine-to-noon workday does not work for you, fear not. Long-term
investing, no matter who makes your portfolios, can help everyone. Grow
your wealth in the stock market through the compounding strategies and
diversified funds mentioned in this book. If you find the time, try to
outperform the market with some stock picks. You do not have to work
nine-to-noon to analyze and trade five medium-term to long-term stocks a
week. By doing your own research, checking news periodically, and acting
independently from the herd, you put yourself at a large financial
advantage over those who ignore their investment future.]{.mark}

[If the first few trades comes easily, do not get ahead of yourself.
When you start trading your own stocks, it is normal to lose money as
you rapidly form and improve your own investing strategies. By taking
small positions, you can minimize your losses, learn underlying trading
strategies, strengthen your trading psychology, and better your overall
trading principles. You will learn from your mistakes, mistakes that
teach you the cold, hard rules of the market. With this development, you
will grow into your brokerage and truly start accumulating
assets.]{.mark}

[Let me give you a quick example. One of the first stocks I bought was
NVIDIA Corporation. \$NVDA was worth a ludicrous 25 percent of my
overall portfolio at the time, and I saw a downward wedge
forming:]{.mark}

![](media/image134.png){width="4.75in" height="3.36in"}

[Â¹]{.mark}

[I knew little about technical analysis when I entered the position
around \$101 during March's lows. However, as the stock progressed
through its downward wedge, I began learning about trendlines. I
identified the wedge pattern above when \$NVDA hit the high \$90s
nearing earning date. However, I incorrectly thought that the downward
wedge meant \$NVDA would go down rather than up, so I made the executive
decision to sell my shares for a two percent profit one day before
\$NVDA reported earnings and broke out of the wedge resistance, gaining
20 percent almost instantly after they reported earnings at 4:20 or so.
The stock continued to rally for the next year and a half, reaching 2018
highs of just under \$300.Â¹ I learned from that mistake! Now you do not
have to make it.]{.mark}

[With technical skills, you can outperform the market to grow your
account faster than average market returns. With that said, there is
nothing wrong with leaving your money in a simple fund or two. Passive
investing is a tremendous way to grow your wealth through assets. Start
early rather than worrying about how much you start with to maximize the
time your money has to grow in the market. Prove to society that you
should be wealthy by accumulating assets. You can live frugally for a
half-decade and put investments into the market that will grow as you
age to better your future life exponentially.]{.mark}

[Think about the future and plan ahead. The stock market is an
astounding place to accumulate assets and receive solid, long-term
historical returns.]{.mark}

[You can do anything you want to leverage your money to make you more
money. Find the ETF you love, the stock that is busting, the bond that
is explosive. It is not easy to commit to financial success, but you can
start your financial future by growing real savings and retirements
through asset accumulation.]{.mark}

Throughout this book, we have seen the past performance of indices,
technical setups, market sector performance, trends in alternative
markets, and much more. Take this knowledge and apply it to the future.
Now is the time to start accumulating assets and wealth. All the
calculations we have made about potential returns, college plans,
personal savings, and more are simply forecasts. It is up to you to take
the information from this book and act on it. Your financial fate
depends on your current decisions.

Think of what you want to achieve in your financial future. Embody your
thoughts in goals. You can achieve anything you can write down and
believe. Now, I invite you to use the immense power of capital markets
and equity investing to forge your own financial future.

**[Epilogue]{.mark}**

Thank you for taking the time to immerse yourself in *Nine to Noon*! Our
work at Wooten Wealth is ever-evolving, much like the financial markets
we aims to decode. Our most impactful new publications are fueled by
astute readers like you. So, if you\'ve got a gem of an idea to make our
resources even more valuable, please don\'t hold back---shoot us an
email at <hi@wootenwealth.com>. And if this book has given you some
nuggets of wisdom, we\'d be super grateful if you could share your
thoughts in an Amazon review. Scan to review:

![A qr code on a white background Description automatically
generated](media/image135.png){width="2.5454549431321083in"
height="2.5454549431321083in"}

Alright, the ball\'s squarely in your court now. Ready to jumpstart your
financial future? Whether you\'re a fresh-faced teen navigating your
first Roth IRA or a seasoned hedge fund manager crunching complex
algorithms, the beauty of this book is its universal relevance. The
investment sphere is democratic like that; it provides equal
opportunities for growth, regardless of your starting point. So go
ahead, let your financial ambition take the driver\'s seat. Set up that
Roth IRA, initiate or upgrade your 401(k), or get fancy with a
traditional IRA or a brokerage account. The American financial market is
a cornucopia of opportunities, and thanks to accounts like these, you've
got a VIP ticket in.

This book has been thoroughly researched. For reference materials, see:
[**refs.ninetonoonsecrets.com**](http://refs.ninetonoonsecrets.com)
